Technical Report Documentation Page 
1. Report No. 
FHWA-SA-02-054 
2. Government Accession No. 
 
3. Recipient’s Catalog No. 
 
5. Report Date 
September 2002 
4. Title and Subtitle 
 
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING CIRCULAR NO. 6 
Shallow Foundations 
 
6. Performing Organization Code 
7. Author(s) 
Robert E. Kimmerling 
8. Performing Organization Report No. 
 
10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS) 
 
9. Performing Organization Name and Address 
PanGEO, Inc. 
3414 N.E. 55th Street 
Seattle, Washington 98105 
11. Contract or Grant No. 
DTFH61-00-C-00031 
13. Type of Report and Period Covered 
Technical Manual 
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 
Office of Bridge Technology 
Federal Highway Administration 
HIBT, Room 3203 
400 Seventh Street, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
14. Sponsoring Agency Code 
 
15. Supplementary Notes 
Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative: Chien-Tan Chang (HIBT) 
FHWA Technical Consultant: Jerry DiMaggio (HIBT) 
16. Abstract 
This document is FHWA’s primary reference of recommended design and procurement 
procedures for shallow foundations.  The Circular presents state-of-the-practice guidance on the 
design of shallow foundation support of highway bridges.  The information is intended to be 
practical in nature, and to especially encourage the cost-effective use of shallow foundations 
bearing on structural fills.  To the greatest extent possible, the document coalesces the research, 
development and application of shallow foundation support for transportation structures over the 
last several decades. 
Detailed design examples are provided for shallow foundations in several bridge support 
applications according to both Service Load Design (Appendix B) and Load and Resistance Factor 
Design (Appendix C) methodologies.  Guidance is also provided for shallow foundation 
applications for minor structures and buildings associated with transportation projects. 
 
17. Key Words 
Shallow foundation, spread footing, 
abutment, mat foundation, bearing capacity, 
settlement, eccentricity, overturning, sliding, 
global stability, LRFD 
18. Distribution Statement 
No Restrictions.  This document is available to the 
public from the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 
19. Security Classification (of this report) 
 
20. Security Classification (of this page) 
 
21. No. of Pages 
310 
22. Price 
 
Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) Reproduction of completed page authorized

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE 
The information in this document has been funded wholly or in part by the U.S. Department of 
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), under Contract No. DTFH61-00-C-
00031 to PanGEO, Inc.  The document has been subjected to peer and administrative review by 
FHWA and has been approved for publication as a FHWA document. 
The contents of this report reflect the views of the author, who is responsible for the facts and 
accuracy of the data presented herein.  The contents do not necessarily reflect the policy of the 
Department of Transportation.  This report does not constitute a standard, specification or 
regulation.  The United States Government does not endorse products or manufacturers.  
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute endorsement or 
recommendation for use by either the author or FHWA.
 

GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING CIRCULAR NO. 6 
 
SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 
PREFACE 
This document is the sixth in a series of Geotechnical Engineering Circulars (GEC) developed by 
the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).  This Circular focuses on the design, procurement 
and construction of shallow foundations for highway structures.  The intended users are 
practicing geotechnical, foundation and structural engineers involved with the design and 
construction of transportation facilities. 
Other circulars in this series include the following: 
- GEC No. 1 – Dynamic Compaction (FHWA-SA-95-037) 
- GEC No. 2 – Earth Retaining Systems (FHWA-SA-96-038) 
- GEC No. 3 – Design Guidance: Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering for 
Highways, Volume I – Design Principles (FHWA-SA-97-076) 
Volume II – Design Examples (FHWA-SA-97-077) 
- GEC No. 4 – Ground Anchors and Anchored Systems (FHWA-SA-99-015) 
- GEC No. 5 – Evaluation of Soil and Rock Properties (FHWA-IF-02-034) 
- GEC No. 7 – Soil Nailing (under development) 
This Circular is intended to be a stand-alone document geared toward providing the practicing 
engineer with a thorough understanding of the analysis and design procedures for shallow 
foundations on soil and rock, with particular emphasis on bridges supported on spread footings.  
Accordingly, the manual is organized as follows: 
• Chapters 1 and 2 present background information regarding the applications of shallow 
foundations for transportation structures. 
• Chapters 3 and 4 present methods used to perform foundation type selection, including 
the minimum level of subsurface investigation and laboratory testing needed to support 
design of shallow foundations. 
• Chapter 5 presents the soil mechanics theory and methods that form the basis of shallow 
foundation design. 
• Chapter 6 describes the shallow foundation design process for bridge foundation support 
on spread footings.  Chapters 5 and 6, together with the detailed bridge foundation 
design examples presented in Appendix B, provide the practical information 
necessary to complete shallow foundation design for a highway bridge. 
i 

• Chapters 7 and 8 discuss the application and special spread footing design considerations 
for minor transportation structures and buildings. 
• Chapters 9 and 10 provide guidelines for procurement and construction monitoring of 
shallow foundations. 
• Appendix A provides recommended materials specifications for embankments 
constructed to support shallow foundations.  The appendix also includes example 
material specifications used by state highway agencies that design and construct spread 
footings in compacted structural embankments. 
• Appendix B includes five worked design examples of shallow foundations for highway 
bridges based on Service Load Design methodology. 
• Appendix C includes practical guidance on the use of Load and Resistance Factor Design 
(LRFD) methodology for shallow foundation design and reworks two of the design 
examples from Appendix B using LRFD. 
This Circular was developed for use as a desktop reference that presents FHWA 
recommended practice on the design and construction of shallow foundations for 
transportation structures.  To the maximum extent possible, this document incorporates the 
latest research in the subject matter area of shallow foundations and their transportation 
applications.  Attention was given throughout the document to ensure the compatibility of its 
content with that of reference materials prepared for the other FHWA publications and training 
modules.  Special efforts were made to ensure that the included material is practical in 
nature and represents the latest developments in the field. 
ii 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Special thanks are given to the state highway agency personnel who contributed to the collection 
of data regarding the state of the practice in using shallow foundations for support of highway 
bridges.  The Nevada, Michigan and Washington State Departments of Transportation are 
especially acknowledged for providing the case history data included in this Circular. 
Notable and much appreciated contributions to the design examples included in this Circular 
were provided by Messrs. George Machan, Will Shallenberger and Kenji Yamasaki of Cornforth 
Consultants, Inc., Portland, Oregon, and by Ms. Tiffany Adams and Mr. Siew Tan of PanGEO, 
Inc., Seattle, Washington. 
Particular gratitude is extended to Mr. Ronald G. Chassie, formerly with FHWA, Mr. Monte J. 
Smith of Sargent Engineers, Inc., Olympia, Washington, and Mr. James L. Withiam of 
D’Appolonia, Monroeville, Pennsylvania for their extremely helpful technical review, input and 
commentary provided on the document. 
For her superior technical editing and outstanding positive attitude during the final production of 
this document, the author extends heartfelt thanks to Ms. Toni Reineke of Author’s Advantage, 
Seattle, Washington. 
Last but not least, the author wishes to acknowledge the members of the Technical Working 
Group, Mr. Mike Adams; Mr. James Brennan; Mr. Myint Lwin; Mr. Mohammed Mulla; Dr. 
Sastry Putcha; Mr. Benjamin S. Rivers; Mr. Jésus M. Rohena; Ms. Sarah Skeen; Mr. Chien-Tan 
Chang, Contracting Officers Technical Representative; and Mr. Jerry DiMaggio for their review 
of the Circular and provision of many constructive and helpful comments. 
 
iii 

ENGLISH TO METRIC (SI) CONVERSION FACTORS 
The primary metric (SI) units used in civil and structural engineering are: 
• meter (m) 
• kilogram (kg) 
• second (s) 
• newton (N) 
• Pascal (Pa = N/m2) 
The following are conversion factors for units presented in this manual: 
Quantity 
From English 
Units 
To Metric (SI) 
Units Multiply by: 
For Aid to Quick 
Mental Calculations 
Mass lb kg 0.453592 1 lb (mass) = 0.5 kg 
Force lb 
kip 
N 
kN 
4.44822 
4.44822 
1 lb (force) = 4.5 N 
1 kip (force) = 4.5 kN 
Force/unit 
length 
plf 
klf 
N/m 
kN/m 
14.5939 
14.5939 
1 plf = 14.5 N/m 
1 klf = 14.5 kN/m 
Pressure, 
stress, modulus 
of elasticity 
psf 
ksf 
psi 
ksi 
Pa 
kPa 
kPa 
Mpa 
47.8803 
47.8803 
6.89476 
6.89476 
1 psf = 48 Pa 
1 ksf = 48 kPa 
1 psi = 6.9 kPa 
1 ksi = 6.9 MPa 
Length 
inch 
foot 
foot 
mm 
m 
mm 
25.4 
0.3048 
304.8 
1 in = 25 mm 
1 ft = 0.3 m 
1 ft = 300 mm 
Area 
square inch 
square foot 
square yard 
mm2 
m2 
m2 
645.16 
0.09290304
0.83612736
1 sq in = 650 mm2 
1 sq ft = 0.09 m2 
1 sq yd = 0.84 m2 
Volume 
cubic inch 
cubic foot 
cubic yard 
mm3 
m3 
m3 
16386.064 
0.0283168 
0.764555 
1 cu in = 16,400 mm3 
1 cu ft = 0.03 m3 
1 cu yd = 0.76 m3 
A few points to remember: 
1. In a “soft” conversion, an English measurement is mathematically converted to its exact 
metric equivalent. 
2. In a “hard” conversion, a new rounded, metric number is created that is convenient to 
work with and easy to remember. 
3. Only the meter and millimeter are used for length (avoid centimeter) 
4. The Pascal (Pa) is the unit for pressure and stress (Pa and N/m2) 
5. Structural calculations should be shown in MPa or kPa 
6. A few basic comparisons worth remembering to help visualize metric dimensions are: 
• One mm is about 1/25 inch or slightly less than the thickness of a dime 
• One m is the length of a yardstick plus about 3 inches 
• One inch is just a fraction (1/64 in) longer than 25 mm (1 in = 25.4 mm) 
• Four inches are about 1/16 inch longer than 100 mm (4 in = 101.6 mm) 
• One foot is about 3/16 inch longer than 300 mm (12 in = 304.8 mm)
iv 

 
CHAPTER 1 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
This Geotechnical Engineering Circular (GEC) coalesces more than four decades of research, 
development and practical experience in the application of shallow foundations for support of 
transportation structures.  The document is intended to be a definitive desk reference for the 
transportation professional responsible for design, procurement and construction of shallow 
foundations for bridges and other transportation-related structures. 
This GEC draws heavily from previous published work by the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA), State (and Local) Highway Agencies (SHAs) and other authors of practical guidance 
related to shallow foundations.  As such, this document generally does not represent “new” 
research but is intended to provide a single reference source for state-of-the-practice information 
on the design and construction of shallow foundations. 
The one exception to the foregoing statement is in the area of bridge support on shallow 
foundations bearing on compacted structural fills.  Special attention has been given to case 
histories and design examples on the use of shallow foundations to support abutments in 
compacted approach embankments. 
1.2 BACKGROUND 
Shallow foundations represent the simplest form of load transfer from a structure to the ground 
beneath.  They are typically constructed with generally small excavations into the ground, do not 
require specialized construction equipment or tools, and are relatively inexpensive.  In most 
cases, shallow foundations are the most cost-effective choice for support of a structure.  Your 
house is most likely supported on shallow spread footings, and you probably supported that deck 
you constructed last year on pre-cast concrete pier blocks because they were inexpensive and 
easy to place. 
Bridges, however, are frequently supported on deep foundations such as driven piling.  This may 
be as much a result of the continued use of past practice than for any other reason and has its 
roots not in highway construction, but railroads.  The need to maintain constant and reliable 
grades over vastly differing ground conditions and topography made the choice to support 
virtually all railroad bridges on piles rather obvious.  At the time of rapid rail expansion in North 
America, and all over the world, the concepts of soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering 
had not even been conceived.  Railroad engineers needed a reliable way to support bridges and 
trestles, and the available technology directed them to driven piles. 
1 

 
As the pace of highway construction increased and eventually passed that of rail construction, 
the knowledge base for construction of bridges passed from the rail engineers to the highway 
engineers.  It is likely that most of the early highway engineers were, in fact, ex-rail engineers, so 
it is not surprising that piling would be chosen to support highway bridges. 
In many cases, and for very good reasons, pile support of transportation structures is wise, if not 
essential.  Waterway crossings demand protection from the potentially disastrous effects of scour 
and other water-related hazards.  Poor ground conditions and transient load conditions, such as 
vessel impact or seismicity, also may dictate the use of deep foundations such as piles.  In more 
recent times, congested urban and suburban environments restrict the available construction 
space.  The use of deep foundations, such as shafts, that can be constructed in a smaller footprint 
may be preferable to the costs associated with shoring, subterranean utility relocation, and right-
of-way acquisition that would be necessary to construct a shallow foundation. 
However, many transportation bridges are associated with upland development and interchanges.  
These locations are frequently removed from waterway hazards and are in areas with competent 
ground conditions.  The engineers responsible for these structures, both geotechnical and 
structural, should be constantly on the lookout for the potential prudent and cost-effective use of 
shallow foundations. 
The fortuitous combination of good, competent ground conditions and an available source of 
good-quality, granular fill material should always be seen as an opportunity to save bridge 
construction costs.  By supporting the bridge abutments within the compacted approach fills, cost 
savings will be realized from the following: 
• A shortened construction schedule 
• Deletion of piles placed or driven through a good-quality, compacted fill to competent 
foundation materials 
• Reduction in concrete and steel materials costs in the case where a spread footing was 
detailed, but bearing below the approach fill 
Various studies on the use of shallow foundations yielded the following information, which 
underscores the potential cost savings that can result from the judicious use of shallow 
foundations: 
• There are currently approximately 600,000 highway bridges in the United States.  The 
average replacement cost is about $500,000 per bridge.  About 50 percent of the 
replacement cost is associated with the substructure.  Shallow foundations can generally 
be constructed for 50 to 65 percent of the cost for deep foundations (Briaud & Gibbens, 
1995). 
• The Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) constructed more than 
500 highway bridges between 1965 and 1980 with one or more abutments or piers 
supported on spread footings (DiMillio, 1982).  WSDOT continues using shallow 
foundations supported in structural fills on a regular basis. 
2 

 
• In 1986, FHWA conducted research to evaluate the settlement performance of 21 bridge 
foundations supported on shallow foundations on cohesionless soil.  This research 
demonstrated that 70 percent of the settlement of the shallow foundations occurred prior 
to placement of the bridge deck.  The average post-deck settlement of the structures 
monitored was less than 6 mm (¼ inch), (Gifford et al., 1987). 
The following important conclusions were drawn from this research: 
1) There is sufficient financial incentive to promote the use of shallow foundations, where 
feasible (Briaud & Gibbens, 1995); 
2) The use of shallow foundation support of bridges has a proven track record on literally 
hundreds of bridge projects (DiMillio, 1982); and 
3) Sufficient performance data exist to alleviate concerns over settlement performance of 
shallow foundations in most bridge support applications where good ground conditions 
exist (Gifford et al., 1987). 
1.3 RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS 
Although the Shallow Foundations GEC is intended to be a stand-alone reference document, 
additional detail and background on the methods and procedures collectively included can be 
found in the following publications: 
• AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 16th Edition, with 1997, 1998, 
1999 and 2000 Interim Revisions (AASHTO, 1996) 
• AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, 2nd Edition, with 1999, 2000 and 2001 
Interim Revisions (AASHTO, 1998) 
• NHI 13212 Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 
2000) 
• NHI 132037 Shallow Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Munfakh et al., 2000) 
• NHI 132031 Subsurface Investigation Workshop Reference Manual (Arman et al., 1997) 
• NHI 132035 Module 5 – Rock Slopes: Design, Excavation and Stabilization (Wyllie & 
Mah, 1998) 
• Foundation Engineering Handbook (Fang, 1991) 
• Soil Mechanics (Lambe & Whitman, 1969) 
• Rock Slope Engineering (Hoek & Bray, 1981) 
3 

 
4 
1.4 SHALLOW FOUNDATION SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS 
Shallow foundations principally distribute structural loads over large areas of near-surface soil or 
rock to lower the intensity of the applied loads to levels tolerable for the foundation soils.  
Shallow foundations are used in many applications in highway projects when the subsurface 
conditions are appropriate.  Such applications include bridge abutments on soil slopes or 
embankments, bridge intermediate piers, retaining walls, culverts, sign posts, noise barriers, and 
rest stop or maintenance building foundations.  Footings or mats may support column loads 
under buildings.  Bridge piers are often supported on shallow foundations using various 
structural configurations. 
The next chapter describes common applications for transportation structure support on shallow 
foundations. 
 

CHAPTER 2 
 
TYPES OF SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The definition of a “shallow foundation” varies from author to author but generally is thought of 
as a foundation that bears at a depth less than about two times the foundation width.  The 
definition is less important than understanding the theoretical assumptions behind the various 
design procedures.  Stated another way, it is important to recognize the theoretical limitations of 
a design procedure that may vary as a function of depth, such as a bearing capacity equation.  
Common types of shallow foundations are shown in Figures 2-1 through 2-5. 
2.2 ISOLATED SPREAD FOOTINGS 
Isolated spread footings (Figure 2-1) are designed to distribute the concentrated loads delivered 
by a single column to prevent shear failure of the bearing material beneath the footing and to 
minimize settlement by reducing the applied bearing stress.  The forces, strength and plan 
dimensions of the column may govern the minimum size of an isolated spread footing.  For 
bridge columns, isolated spread footings are typically greater than 3 m by 3 m (10 feet by 10 
feet).  These dimensions will increase when eccentric loads are distributed to the footing.  The 
size of the footing is a function of the loads distributed by the supported column and the strength 
and compressibility characteristics of the bearing materials beneath the footing.  Structural 
design of the footing includes consideration for moment resistance at the face of the column and 
in the short direction of the footing, as well as shear and punching around the column. 
 
Figure 2-1: Isolated Spread Footing 
5 

2.3 CONTINUOUS STRIP SPREAD FOOTINGS 
The most commonly used type of foundation for buildings is the continuous strip spread footing 
(Figure 2-2).  Continuous or strip footings generally have a minimum length to width ratio of at 
least 5 (i.e., length > 5 x width).  They support a single row of columns or a bearing wall to 
reduce the pressure on the bearing materials.  These footings may tie columns together in one 
direction.  Sizing and structural design considerations are similar to isolated spread footings with 
the exception that plane strain conditions are assumed to exist in the direction parallel to the long 
axis of the footing.  The structural design of these footings is generally governed by beam shear 
and bending moments.   
 
Figure 2-2: Continuous Strip Spread Footing 
2.4 SPREAD FOOTINGS WITH CANTILEVER STEMWALLS 
When a spread footing with a bearing wall is used to resist lateral loads applied by backfill, the 
foundation and the wall must perform both vertical load distribution and retaining wall functions.  
The foundation is designed to resist the resulting eccentric load, and the lateral earth pressures 
are resisted by cantilever action of the stemwall and overturning resistance provided by the 
footing. 
2.4.1 Bridge Abutments  
Bridge abutments are required to perform numerous functions, including the following: 
• Retain the earthen backfill behind the abutment 
• Support the superstructure and distribute the loads to the bearing materials below the 
spread footing 
• Provide a transition to the approach fill  
6 

• Depending on the structure type, accommodate shrinkage and temperature movements 
within the superstructure 
Spread footings with cantilever stemwalls are well suited to performing these multiple functions.  
The general arrangement of a bridge abutment with spread footing and cantilever stemwall is 
shown in Figure 2-3. 
 
Figure 2-3: Spread Footing with Cantilever Stemwall  
at Bridge Abutment 
2.4.2 Retaining Structures 
The bases of semi-gravity concrete cantilever retaining walls (inverted “T” walls) are essentially 
shallow spread footings.  The wall derives its ability to resist loads from a combination of the 
dead weight of the backfill on the heel of the wall footing and the structural cantilever of the 
stem (Figure 2-4). 
2.4.3 Building Foundations 
When a building stemwall is buried, partially buried or acts as a basement wall, the stemwall 
resists the lateral earth pressures of the backfill.  Unlike bridge abutments and semi-gravity 
cantilever walls, the tops or the ends of the stemwalls are frequently restrained by other structural 
members (e.g., beams, floors, transverse interior walls, etc.) to provide additional structural 
resistance. 
 
7 

 
Figure 2-4: Semi-Gravity Cantilever Retaining Wall 
2.5 COMBINATION FOOTINGS 
Combination, or combined, footings are similar to isolated spread footings except that they 
support two or more columns and are rectangular or trapezoidal in shape (Figure 2-5).  They are 
primarily used when the column spacing is non-uniform (Bowles, 1996) or when isolated spread 
footings become so closely spaced that a combination footing is simpler to form and construct.  
In the case of bridge abutments, an example of a combination footing is the so-called “spill-
through” type abutment (Figure 2-6).  This configuration was used during some of the initial 
construction of the Interstate freeways on new alignments where spread footings could be 
founded on competent native soils.  Spill-through abutments are also used at stream crossings to 
make sure foundations are below the scour level of the stream. 
Due to the frame action that develops with combination footings, they can be used to resist large 
overturning or rotational moments in the longitudinal direction of the column row.   
There are a number of approaches for designing and constructing combined footings.  The choice 
depends on the available space, load distribution among the columns supported by the footing, 
variations of soil properties supporting the footing and economics. 
8 

 
Figure 2-5: Combined Footing 
 
2
1
Original Ground
Abutment Fill
Toe of Side Slope
Toe of End Slope
 
Figure 2-6: Spill-Through Abutment on Combination Strip Footing 
9 

2.6 MAT FOUNDATIONS 
A mat foundation consists of a single heavily reinforced concrete slab, which underlies the entire 
structure or a major portion of the structure.  Mat foundations are often economical when spread 
footings would cover more than about 50 percent of the footprint of the plan area of a structure 
(Peck et al. 1974).  A mat (Figure 2-7) typically supports a number of columns and/or walls in 
either direction or a uniformly distributed load (i.e., tank).  The principal advantage of a mat 
foundation is its ability to bridge over soft spots and reduce differential movement. 
Structures founded on relatively weak soils or lightweight structures may be economically 
supported on mat foundations.  Column and wall loads are transferred to the foundation materials 
through the mat foundation.  Mat foundations distribute the loads over a large area, thus reducing 
the intensity of contact pressures.  Mat foundations are designed with sufficient reinforcement 
and thickness to be rigid enough to distribute column and wall loads, minimizing differential 
settlements and tolerating larger uniform settlements.  Often the mat also serves as the base floor 
level of building structures.   
Mat foundations have limited applicability for bridge support, except where large bridge piers, 
such as bascules or other movable bridge supports, have the opportunity to bear at relatively 
shallow depth without deep foundation support.  This type of application may arguably be a deep 
foundation, but the design of such a pier may include consideration of the base of the bascule 
pier as a mat.  Discussion of large mat foundation design is included in Section 8.6. 
A more common application of mat foundations to transportation structures might include lightly 
loaded rest or maintenance facilities such as small masonry block structures or sand storage bins 
or sheds, or box culverts constructed as a continuous structure. 
10 
REINFORCED CONCRETE MAT
 
Figure 2-7: Typical Mat Foundation 

2.7 SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS IN PERFORMANCE APPLICATIONS  
High quality case histories regarding shallow foundations in transportation applications are 
difficult to obtain, largely because settlement data following construction are often not recorded.  
This makes it difficult to evaluate the performance of the foundation with respect to the 
settlement predictions made during design.  Several relevant case histories are documented in 
“Performance of Highway Bridge Abutments on Spread Footings” (DiMillio, 1982).  These case 
histories are not reproduced here.  However, three new case histories are included to highlight 
design and construction practices in use by various state highway agencies that take advantage of 
the cost savings available by constructing spread footings in compacted engineered fills and in 
competent natural ground. 
2.7.1 Case History No. 1: I-5 Kalama Interchange, Washington 
Project Background 
During Interstate construction in the 1960s and 1970s, the Washington State Highway 
Commission, later to become the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT), 
constructed numerous bridges with foundation support by shallow spread footings, many of 
which were built on structural fills (DiMillio, 1982).  This case history demonstrates the 
significant cost savings achievable through the process of thorough site investigation, laboratory 
testing, application of sound geotechnical engineering and follow-through during construction 
with the observational method (Peck, 1969).  The observational method in this application 
included measuring settlement as a function of time during a settlement delay period following 
construction of the approach embankment.  These data were used to evaluate the feasibility of 
using shallow foundations at the abutments and to predict long-term settlement potential for the 
abutment footings. 
The project included design and construction of a 71-m (233-ft) long by 8.5-m (28-ft) wide, four-
span, prestressed concrete structure that provides east-west traffic access across Interstate 5 in 
Kalama, a town in southwestern Washington State.  The foundation elements are numbered as 
Piers 1 through 5.  Note that WSDOT calls out abutments as piers, so Piers 1 and 5 are the 
abutments.  The bridge layout and the location of subsurface exploration borings are shown in 
Figure 2-8.  The bridge was constructed in 1968 and 1969. 
Subsurface Conditions 
The bridge alignment is underlain by approximately 30 m (100 ft) of alluvial sediments, 
consisting of interbedded loose to medium dense sand, soft to medium stiff silt and occasional 
peat layers.  Bedrock was encountered directly below the alluvium.  Summary logs of three 
exploratory borings drilled along the bridge alignment are shown in Figure 2-9.  Standard 
Penetration Test (SPT) N-values and moisture content test results are also indicated on the 
profile. 
11 

Note: Dimensions in feet (1 ft = 0.305 m) 
Figure 2-8: Bridge Layout and Exploration Plan, I-5 Kalama Interchange 
Results of three one-dimensional consolidation tests were available and are summarized in Table 
2-1. 
Foundation Design Approach 
In light of the excessive depth of compressible soil and the high costs associated with a deep 
foundation system, the Washington State Highway Commission decided to support the bridge on 
conventional spread footings.  To reduce the potential for post-construction settlement of the site 
soils and to improve the level of performance for the footings, ground improvement by means of 
preloading was performed prior to construction of the footings.  During the design and planning 
phase of the project, a preload period of one year was allowed in the construction schedule.   
At least 3 m (10 ft) of compacted granular fill was maintained below the footings at the interior 
piers.  Up to 14 m (45 ft) of compacted granular fill was placed at the abutments (Figure 2-9).   
 
12 

Note: Dimensions in feet (1 ft = 0.305 m) 
Figure 2-9: Subsurface Profile, I-5 Kalama Interchange 
 
TABLE 2-1: RESULTS OF ONE-DIMENSIONAL CONSOLIDATION TESTS, 
I-5 KALAMA INTERCHANGE 
Sample Soil Type Test Results 
Test Hole 24U @ 2.9 m 
(Pier 1/West Abutment) 
Gray sandy 
silt 
Moisture = 46%; Moist unit weight = 16.5 
kN/m3; Compression Index Cc = 0.19 
Test Hole 28U @ 5.2 m 
(Pier 5/East Abutment) 
Gray clay-
silt 
Moisture = 50%; Moist unit weight = 17.1 
kN/m3; Compression Index Cc = 0.22 
Test Hole 28U @ 16.8 m 
(Pier 5/East Abutment) 
Gray clay-
silt 
Moisture = 49%; Moist unit weight = 16.8 
kN/m3; Compression Index Cc = 0.24 
13 

The specification for Gravel Borrow included in Appendix A is currently used by WSDOT for 
granular fills beneath footings.  This specification has not changed significantly since the time 
this bridge was built.  A maximum allowable bearing pressure of 3 tsf was used for sizing the 
footings.  This is the presumptive value used by WSDOT for fills constructed using Gravel 
Borrow.  The actual design bearing pressures were 280 kPa (2.9 tsf) for Piers 1 through 4, and 
244 kPa (2.55 tsf) for Pier 5.   
Construction Sequencing and Performance 
The preload fill was placed in two stages such that the foundation soils would gain strength 
during the Stage 1 preload operation and to reduce the potential for embankment instability.  In 
mid-October 1967, Stage 1 preload fill was completed, and as much as 7.6 m (25 ft) of fill was 
placed.  Stage 2 preload fill was placed about 6 months after completion of Stage 1.  The total 
preload fill thickness was about 13 m (43 ft) and 14.6 m (48 ft) thick at abutment Piers 1 and 5, 
respectively.  At the interior piers, the preload fill was about 7.6 m (25 ft) thick.  Available data 
indicated that, in late June 1968, 0.34 m (1.1 ft) and 0.9 m (3.0 ft) of settlement had occurred 
under the preload fill at Piers 1 and 5, respectively.  Settlement data for the interior piers preload 
fill are not available. 
Subsequent to the preloading, footings and columns at Piers 3 through 5 were completed in 
August 1968.  Construction at Piers 1 and 2 was delayed until November 1968 because 3 months 
earlier, when Piers 3 through 5 were constructed, settlement data indicated that the rate of 
settlement of the approach fills was still excessive. 
The bridge deck was completed in December 1968.  Settlement monitoring of the bridge deck 
was performed on a monthly basis for the following 4 months.  At the end of the monitoring 
period in April 1969, 37 to 49 mm (0.12 to 0.16 ft) of settlement was measured at the abutments 
and 21 to 34 mm (0.07 to 0.11 ft) at the interior piers.  Detailed settlement data are shown in 
Table 2-2 and are plotted in Figure 2-10.  The settlement data show that vertical deflections at 
each pier are relatively uniform and differential settlement is small.  Based on this data, the 
maximum angular distortion (δ′/l) between adjacent piers is less than 0.002. 
The project was completed in June 1969, and the bridge has performed well since its completion 
more than 30 years ago.  The bridge as it appears today is shown in Figure 2-11. 
Costs 
Using an inflation-adjusted cost of $20 per square foot for a prestressed girder bridge in a non-
water crossing situation (source: WSDOT price records, 1975 data), the estimated contract 
amount for the EB-line under crossing was about $130,000.  According to a project 
memorandum, the use of the spread footings instead of timber piles represented savings of 
approximately $25,000.  The estimated savings were based on the assumption that a total of 124 
timber piles 15 to 18 m (50 to 60 ft) in length would be adequate for supporting the bridge.  The 
cost savings of deleting the piling therefore represented about 20 percent of the total cost of the 
structure. 
14 

TABLE 2-2: SETTLEMENT DATA – AFTER COMPLETION OF BRIDGE  
DECK, I-5 KALAMA INTERCHANGE 
 12/20/68 1/7/69 2/5/69 3/11/69 4/29/69
SE Corner of S Wing Wall 53.16 53.14 53.10 53.05 53.02 Pier 1 SE Corner of N Wing Wall 53.13 53.10 53.05 52.97 52.97 
S Side of Deck 52.75 52.74 52.69 52.68 52.67 Pier 2 N Side of Deck 52.77 52.75 52.70 52.68 52.66 
S Side of Deck 52.02 52.01 51.96 51.96 51.95 Pier 3 N Side of Deck 52.01 52.00 51.95 51.95 51.93 
S Side of Deck 51.29 51.28 51.22 51.22 51.20 Pier 4 N Side of Deck 51.26 51.25 51.19 51.18 51.15 
SE Corner of S Wing Wall 50.60 50.59 50.55 50.52 50.48 Pier 5 SE Corner of N Wing Wall 50.59 50.57 50.52 50.49 50.45 
Note: Survey data in feet (1 ft = 0.305 m) 
 
50.00
50.50
51.00
51.50
52.00
52.50
53.00
53.50
28-Nov-68 28-Dec-68 27-Jan-69 26-Feb-69 28-Mar-69 27-Apr-69 27-May-69
 
Note: Data in feet (1 ft = 0.305 m) 
Figure 2-10: Settlement Following Completion of Bridge Deck, I-5 Kalama Interchange 
Acknowledgment:  Al Kilian, formerly of WSDOT, collected and compiled the information for 
this case history, and Dave Jenkins of WSDOT Geotechnical Branch made this information 
available.  Mike Bauer of the WSDOT Bridge and Structures Office provided the historical cost 
data. 
 
15 

 
Figure 2-11: I-5 Kalama Interchange 
2.7.2 Case History No. 2: I-580 Mt. Rose Highway Interchange, Nevada 
Project Background 
This case history is of a bridge at the Mt. Rose Highway Interchange on Interstate Highway 580, 
in Washoe County, Nevada.  The bridge is the northbound I-580 overpass over Mt. Rose 
Highway and was constructed in 1994.  The bridge is 107.6 m (353 ft) long and 25.8 m (84.5 ft) 
wide, and is a two-span concrete structure supported by two end abutments and an intermediate 
pier (Figure 2-12).  The abutments and pier are supported by spread footings. 
Subsurface Conditions 
According to the geotechnical investigation (SHB AGRA, 1993), the site lies within a 
combination of Donner Lake Glacial Outwash and Mt. Rose Alluvial Fan Deposits.  A total of 10 
borings were drilled, from which the following information was obtained. 
North Abutment Area:  The predominant soil type in this area is a dense, fine- to medium-
grained silty sand to sand with varying amounts of fine to coarse gravels and cobbles.  Blow 
counts (SPT N-values) generally ranged from 25 to 75, with 50 as the average. 
16 

Figure 2-12:  Mt. Rose Interchange: I-580 Overcrossing at Mt. Rose Highway, Nevada 
Center Pier Area:  From approximately 0.6 to 7.6 m (2 to 25 ft) below the existing surface grade, 
a medium dense to very dense, fine- to medium-grained silty sand to sand was encountered.  This 
horizon contained varying amounts of fine to coarse gravels and occasional cobbles.  This layer 
was underlain by 1.5 to 3.0 m (5 to 10 ft) thick, low to medium plasticity, hard clayey sand to 
clayey gravel with varying amounts of fine to coarse gravels, which graded into a very dense 
sandy gravel with depth. 
South Abutment Area:  The predominant soil type in this area is a dense to very dense, fine- to 
medium-grained silty sand to sand with varying amounts of fine to coarse gravels. 
Ground water was not encountered during the field exploration and is believed to lie at depths 
greater than 30 m (100 ft) below the site. 
Foundation Design Approach 
As indicated above, the foundation soils consist primarily of dense, silty sand to sand.  The 
estimated settlements of spread footings were 32 mm for the abutments and 44 to 57 mm for the 
center pier.  These settlements were associated with a design bearing pressure of 190 kPa (2 tons 
17 

per square foot) and were considered to be within tolerable limits.  Thus, spread footings were 
selected for the abutments and pier.  Due to the sloping terrain at the abutments, the abutment 
footings were founded on both cuts and structural fills.  The maximum height of the structural 
fill is about 2.5 m (8 ft).  The center pier is founded on natural ground.  The elevation of the 
bridge is shown in Figure 2-13. 
Figure 2-13: Elevation of Mt. Rose Interchange Bridge, I-580, Nevada 
Construction Sequencing and Performance 
The structural fills on which the footings were founded were compacted aggregate base (Nevada 
DOT designation is Type 1 Class B Aggregate Base), which consisted of crushed rock, 100 
percent passing the 37.5 mm (1½ in) sieve and 1 to 12 percent passing the 75 µm (No. 200) sieve 
(other materials requirements are included in specifications in Appendix A).  Construction 
specifications called for this material to be placed in lifts not exceeding 200 mm (8 in) in 
thickness, and compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density as determined by Test Method 
No. Nev. T101.  (Note:  T101 is based on the use of the Harvard Miniature Compaction Device.)  
Figure 2-14 shows the footing of the south abutment. 
Settlement of the bridge structure was not monitored.  According to the Nevada DOT, the 
structure has performed without problems since construction. 
18 

 
Figure 2-14: Footing at South Abutment, I-580, Nevada 
Costs 
This bridge was part of a project that involved about 7.2 km (4.5 mi) of new Interstate highway 
with numerous structures.  The total construction cost of the entire project was about $52.9 
million.  The contract items were measured and paid on a unit-cost basis for the entire project, so 
direct comparison of individual bridge costs is not possible.  However, the unit contract price to 
drive piles elsewhere on the project was $1,000 per pile, and the price for furnishing pipe piles 
was $65 per 0.3 m (1 ft).  Assuming approximately 20 piles about 7.5 m (25 ft) in length had 
been driven at each abutment (and if the spread footings were not founded on structural fill), the 
cost savings based on deletion of the piles alone is estimated at $105,000.  Assuming an average 
estimated cost for the entire structure of about $1,000 per square meter, the total estimated 
structure cost was about $2.8 million.  The costs savings of using spread footings at the 
abutments bearing in compacted structural fills are therefore estimated to be at least 4 percent of 
the overall cost of the structure. 
Acknowledgment: Parviz Noori, Todd Stefonowicz, and Jeff Palmer of Nevada DOT provided 
the information for this case history. 
19 

2.7.3 Case History No. 3: Cadillac Bypass Structure S01, Michigan 
Project Background 
The Cadillac Bypass project involves extending the limited-access US-131 around Cadillac to 
Manton, Michigan.  The project includes 24 structures, 10 of which are or will be supported on 
spread footings.  The entire project is scheduled for completion in 2004. 
Structure S01, one of the structures supported on spread footings, is the northbound US-131 
relocation (overpass) over S–43 Road and is 77.8 m (255.4 ft) long and 14.7 m (48.3 ft) wide.  It 
is a three-span concrete structure with two abutments and two piers.  Figure 2-15 shows an 
elevation of the bridge. 
Figure 2-15: Elevation of Cadillac Bypass Structure S01, Michigan 
Subsurface Conditions 
Four borings were drilled at the site, one at each at abutment and pier location.  Subsurface 
conditions at the site consist of a loose sand layer, up to about 6 m (20 ft) thick, underlain by 
medium dense to very dense sand with trace fine gravel.  Three borings were dry at the time of 
completion, and the fourth had a water level 2.4 m (8 ft) below the ground surface. 
Foundation Design Approach 
The abutment and pier footings were placed on structural fill (Michigan DOT designation is 
Structure Embankment).  Structure Embankment was placed on the existing ground after topsoil 
removal.  Abutment footings were placed on the Structure Embankment.  The thickness of the 
Structure Embankment under the abutment footings was about 7.6 m (25 ft) at the centerline.  
20 

Loose soils were removed from under the pier locations and backfilled with Structure 
Embankment.  Pier footings were placed on Structure Embankment with a total thickness of over 
4.6 m (15 ft).  Figure 2-16 shows the structural fill under and above the footings of the bridge. 
Figure 2-16: Profile Along Centerline Showing the Limits of Structural Fill, 
Cadillac Bypass Structure S01, Michigan 
Construction Sequencing and Performance 
Structure Embankment consisted of granular material with 100 percent passing the 150 mm (6 
in) sieve, 95 to 100 percent passing the 75 mm (3 in) sieve, and 0 to 15 percent passing the 75 
µm (No. 200) sieve.  It was placed in lifts with a thickness of 230 mm (9 in) to 380 mm (15 in) 
and compacted to 100 percent of the Maximum Unit Weight.  The Maximum Unit Weight is 
determined by a method that is equivalent to the Modified Proctor Method.  The specifications 
for the embankment material are included in Appendix A.  Settlement of the structure has not 
been monitored. 
Costs 
The estimated cost for the entire project is $117 million.  The cost for Structure S01 alone was 
about $2.3 million.  Comparative costs of pile foundations were not available, but based on a 
rule-of-thumb cost for an in-place pile of about $2,500 and an assumption that about 18 piles per 
pier would be required if spread footings were not used, the cost savings is estimated at about 
$180,000, or about 8 percent of the total structure cost. 
Acknowledgment:  Richard Endres, Greg Perry and Al Rhodes of the Michigan DOT provided 
the information for this case history. 
21 

22 
2.8 PRE-CAST FOUNDATION ELEMENTS, MUDSILLS AND TEMPORARY FOOTINGS 
Many bridges require temporary support, or falsework, in order to complete the permanent 
structure.  Falsework is, in turn, supported on temporary foundations.  Because they are 
temporary, these foundations do not need the same design considerations as permanent 
structures.  For instance, frost protection is usually not required, so the temporary footings can 
bear at shallow depth or directly on the ground surface. 
However, the temporary footing still must be designed to limit the stress applied to the 
supporting soil such that a shear failure does not develop (see Section 5.2), and to limit the 
settlement to a tolerable amount (Section 5.3).  The analytical procedures for checking the 
performance of a temporary footing are the same as for permanent structures (Chapters 5 and 6).  
Many transportation agencies include a requirement to perform a field plate load test (ASTM 
Test Method 1194 and AASHTO test method 235 are identical) to confirm the load-carrying 
capacity and settlement of falsework foundations.  Plate load test data should be used with 
caution when a stiff, near surface crust overlies softer, saturated soils, since the depth of 
influence (see Section 3.1.5) will be less for the plate than the actual falsework foundations.  In 
this case, site-specific settlement analyses should be required. 
 

CHAPTER 3 
 
SHALLOW FOUNDATION TYPE SELECTION 
3.1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
In most cases, spread footings represent the most economical foundation type if they do not have 
to be installed deeply into the ground.  At some limiting depth, a “shallow” foundation begins to 
behave like and have the associated construction needs of a “deep” foundation.  This limiting 
depth is somewhat arbitrary but generally can be taken as about two times the least-plan 
dimension of the foundation.   
The decision to use a shallow foundation for support of a structure includes checking that an 
adequate margin of safety is provided against failure of the ground below the bearing depth 
(bearing capacity failure), and checking that deformations (settlement) under expected loading 
conditions will be acceptable.  Design checks will also be performed to make sure the footing 
will not slide and that it is stable (e.g., will not overturn). 
If the foundation can meet these fundamental design requirements, it also must be constructible.  
Constructability considerations are discussed in Section 3.3. 
3.1.1 Footings on Cohesionless Soils 
Granular, or cohesionless, soils are generally more suited to support of shallow foundations than 
cohesive soils, particularly when a foundation is supported on a structural fill.  Cohesionless soils 
tend to be less prone to settlement under applied loads.  Settlement of cohesionless soils 
generally occurs rapidly, as loads are applied. 
Special consideration should be given to situations in which the following conditions may occur 
or be present: 
• Water table close to or above the foundation bearing elevation.  Saturated ground 
conditions will result in reduced effective stresses in the soils supporting the footing and 
in an associated reduction in the bearing capacity of the soil.  See Section 4.4 for 
discussion of effective stress theory and computation and Chapter 5 for specific 
foundation design criteria and considerations. 
• Steep slopes near the bearing elevation of a footing.  An adequate factor of safety with 
respect to global stability must be maintained over the life of the structure. 
• Presence of collapsible soils.  Collapsible soils are generally stable when dry, but upon 
wetting or saturation, rapid settlement (collapse) can occur that could exceed the 
performance (settlement) criteria for the structure.  Collapsible soils are regional in their 
23 

occurrence.  The potential for the presence of collapsible soils should be evaluated based 
on site-specific subsurface data and on local knowledge and experience. 
• Presence of seismic hazards.  Seismic hazards, including liquefaction potential under 
seismic conditions, should be evaluated.  If liquefaction is possible, the dynamic stability 
of the footing should be checked and the potential for dynamic settlement assessed. 
3.1.2 Footings on Cohesive Soils 
Normally consolidated cohesive soils (clays) will experience consolidation settlement when 
subjected to an increase in stress such as that applied by a shallow foundation.  The consolidation 
process and the procedure for calculating consolidation settlement are described in Section 5.3.  
Normally consolidated cohesive soils may also exhibit relatively low shear strength when loaded 
rapidly.  This is an undrained loading condition.  Therefore, both the bearing capacity of such 
soils and the potential for short- and long-term settlement must be evaluated as part of the 
preliminary design process when considering support of a shallow foundation on cohesive soils. 
Because cohesive soils can experience large increases and decreases in volume as a result of 
changes in water content, bridge foundations should not be supported on embankments 
constructed of such materials.  Expansive clays in natural conditions can also experience large 
volume changes.  If clay soils are encountered at a site, the expansive potential should be 
evaluated as part of the site investigation and laboratory testing program before confirming the 
suitability of spread footings supported on the natural clay soils.  Additional information on the 
identification of expansive soils can be found in the Subsurface Investigation Workshop 
Reference Manual (Arman et al., 1997). 
Lightly overconsolidated cohesive soils (e.g., materials with over-consolidation ratios (OCR) of 
about 1 to 2) may also experience consolidation settlement in primary (virgin) compression 
under the range of stresses applied by a spread footing.  Serviceability must be checked during 
the foundation type selection process to make sure total and differential settlements are within 
the acceptable performance range for the structure. 
Heavily overconsolidated cohesive soils with OCRs greater than about 3 or 4 represent the most 
suitable cohesive soil conditions for consideration of support of shallow foundations.  Heavily 
overconsolidated clays possess relatively high strength and low compressibility characteristics. 
3.1.3 Footings on Intermediate Geomaterials (IGMs) and Rock 
Intermediate geomaterial (IGM) is a term for ground conditions that are dense and stiff enough 
to no longer be characterized as a “soil” but are not considered intact “rock” (O’Neill et al., 
1996).  Even so, the term is convenient for discussions of ground conditions that differ in a 
geologic sense, but that behave similarly from an engineering perspective.  IGMs include 
materials such as glacial till, completely weathered rock, poorly to moderately indurated 
sediments and chemically cemented materials.  These materials may occur as the transition from 
overburden soil to intact rock.  The term IGM is therefore rather broad in its definition and may 
carry regional connotations that are not consistent from location to location.  For example, what 
24 

may be considered “soft” sedimentary rock in one part of the world may be considered elsewhere 
to be so weak that it should be treated, for engineering purposes, as a soil.   
For the purpose of shallow foundation discussions here, IGMs are considered to be sufficiently 
strong and stiff such that design considerations other than the strength of the material (e.g., 
overturning potential) will typically govern the design of a shallow foundation supported on such 
a material.  Note that by their nature, IGMs may demand consideration of rock-like 
characteristics, such as mass structure and discontinuities. 
Where an IGM or rock material is at or near the ground surface, the most economical foundation 
system to support highway structures will usually be a shallow foundation bearing in or on the 
IGM or rock.  Three basic types of shallow foundations on IGMs or rock are shown in Figure  
3-1. 
IGM or Intact Rock
Backfill Backfill
Potential Plane of
Weakness
Backfill
 
 (a) (b) (c)  
Figure 3-1:  Typical Shallow Foundations on IGM or Rock for  
Highway and Bridge Structures 
Figure 3-1(a) illustrates a shallow footing founded directly on a relatively horizontal or mildly 
sloping, stable IGM or rock surface.   
Figure 3-1(b) shows a shallow foundation near the crest of an IGM or rock slope.  The 
geotechnical design of foundations near the crest of a slope should include detailed consideration 
of global stability, including planar, wedge, sliding and toppling failure mechanisms of the 
supporting slope.  The potential for slope instability in IGMs and rock may be a function of the 
intact mass strength properties, orientation and condition of unfavorable structure or 
discontinuities (e.g., bedding, joints, foliations, etc.) or both.  The stability analysis of IGM and 
rock slopes is not presented in detail here.  The reader is referred to NHI Module 5, “Rock 
Slopes” (Wyllie & Mah, 1998) and Rock Slope Engineering (Hoek & Bray, 1981) for detailed 
discussions of rock slope stability analysis and design. 
When supporting structures with large horizontal or uplift loads, shallow foundations may need 
to be tied into the IGM or rock to provide sufficient resistance to uplift and lateral forces and 
overturning moments, as portrayed in Figure 3-1(c).  When considering design of a foundation in 
25 

IGM or rock conditions that will be required to resist large uplift or lateral loads, consideration 
should be given to the use, economics and constructability of a deep foundation socketed into the 
foundation material, as discussed in Drilled Shafts: Construction Procedures and Design 
Methods (O’Neill & Reese, 1999).  Other options for resistance of uplift or lateral loads include 
micropiles and ground anchors.  Refer to Micropile Design and Construction Guidelines 
Implementation Manual (Armour et al., 2000) and GEC No. 4: Ground Anchors and Anchored 
Systems (Sabatini et al., 1999) for guidance regarding these options. 
Rock and IGMs can perform as competent and reliable foundation materials.  However, the 
condition of the rock or IGM must be evaluated for degree of weathering, rock strength, 
durability, and the orientation and condition of discontinuities (e.g., joints, bedding or faults).  
An IGM or rock mass can also be shattered by blasting and/or undermined by cavities that can 
compromise the capability of the material to provide reliable support for a shallow foundation.  
Heavily overconsolidated IGMs, such as glacially overridden lakebed sediments and some 
residual weathered rock materials, may possess high intact strength but, if subjected to adverse 
stress changes or minimal shearing, will experience a drastic reduction in shear strength.  
Therefore, the stress history of an IGM should be considered during the foundation type 
selection process. 
The selection of a shallow foundation supported on IGM or rock should therefore include early 
assessment of global stability (including structurally controlled failure mechanisms) and the 
potential for loss of stability due to sinkhole or subterranean cavern collapse.  As with shallow 
foundations bearing on soils, the design of a footing on IGM or rock should also include 
checking bearing capacity, sliding, overturning and settlement. 
3.1.4 Scour Potential  
Scour is a hydraulic erosion process that lowers the grade of a water channel or river bed.  This 
erosion is caused by flowing water.  Excessive removal of the material around a shallow 
foundation or undermining of a footing can cause excessive deformation or structure collapse.  
Foundations for bridges and structures located near rivers, channels and in floodplains should be 
located below the limits of scour.  If the scour depth is too deep for a shallow foundation to be 
constructed using normal methods, consideration should be given to selection of a deep 
foundation system for support of the structure.  Additional details regarding scour potential 
evaluation and protection are presented in Section 6.2.2. 
3.1.5 Depth of Influence and Frost Protection 
Because spread footings have plan dimensions of limited areal extent, the stress induced in the 
ground mass below the footing will diminish with depth.  In general, the ground conditions at a 
depth greater than about four times the lesser plan dimension of a continuous spread footing will 
be affected by less than about ten percent of the stresses induced under the footing (2 times the 
lesser plan dimension for square or nearly square footings).  Closely spaced footings can have 
overlapping zones of influence that can combine to produce a zone of influence that extends 
deeper than these rules of thumb.  The procedures in Section 5.3 can be used to calculate the 
stress at a given depth and location below a spread footing.  These stress distributions are used in 
Chapter 5 for evaluation of bearing capacity and settlement. 
26 

Spread footings should be designed to bear below the frost depth for local conditions, or on 
materials that are not frost susceptible.  Section 6.2.3 contains additional discussion on frost 
protection. 
As can be seen from the stress bulbs in Figures 5-9 and 5-10, the depth of stress influence is a 
function of the width of the footing.  The dimensions of the footing therefore play a role in the 
assessment of settlement and bearing capacity.  Note that presumptive bearing capacities for 
footings on soils that can be found in the literature are typically not a function of width.  This is 
one reason why presumptive values for footings on soils are not presented in this manual, and 
also why they should be used with caution, or for preliminary design purposes only. 
3.2 GEOTECHNICAL CRITERIA IN PRELIMINARY DESIGN 
The geotechnical engineer should provide input to the preliminary design process.  At this time 
there is usually insufficient information about pier locations and bridge length to warrant detailed 
subsurface information with borings.  If no existing subsurface information is available in the 
area, preliminary borings may be appropriate to gain a general understanding of the subsurface 
conditions at the site.  An assessment of ground conditions based on geologic and site 
reconnaissance, supplemented with subsurface information (either from existing information or 
preliminary explorations), is critical to structure layout and configuration.  Some key 
considerations may include the following. 
• Potential soft or weak ground conditions can be identified that will limit the steepness of 
embankment slopes.  For bridges, this may dictate pier locations and overall structure 
length. 
• Geologic hazards, such as earthquakes, volcanic eruption, flood, tsunami, avalanche, 
landslides, collapsible ground conditions, expansive soils, liquefaction potential, etc., 
should be identified.  The presence of any of these conditions at a structure site can have 
significant impact not only on foundation type selection, but also on design, cost and/or 
construction schedules. 
• Feasible foundations types should be evaluated.  There may be sufficient existing 
information to conclude that shallow foundations are feasible at a site. 
Early consultation with the geotechnical engineer can help avoid costly redesign, either late in 
the project development process or during construction. 
3.3 SHORING AND CONSTRUCTION EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS 
The design of a spread footing should be both efficient and constructible.  Sometimes temporary 
shoring has to be installed before a spread footing can be constructed.  The designer should 
consider whether shoring will be necessary and how it can be constructed.  Some of the 
questions a designer should ask prior to selection of a shallow foundation include: 
• Will normal excavation equipment be capable of constructing the footing, or will rock or 
difficult ground conditions in the excavation require special equipment?  The 
geotechnical engineer should consider the type of equipment that will be necessary for 
27 

28 
the excavation, based on the results of the geotechnical investigation, and provide 
sufficient commentary in the geotechnical report for the structural designer and estimator 
to adequately specify the construction requirements.   
• Will the excavation be stable under the temporary conditions, or will shoring be required 
to stabilize excavation sidewalls?  The geotechnical engineer should consider the 
maximum slope angles at which the excavation slopes will stand without external 
support, and evaluate the potential for instability due to zones of weak ground and the 
location of the ground water table. 
• Will obstructions be encountered?  Buried structures, utilities, old pile foundations or 
boulders can result in contractor claims for additional compensation if provisions are not 
made for relocation or removal of obstructions in the footing excavation.  The 
geotechnical investigation may or may not disclose the presence of obstructions, but the 
geotechnical engineer may provide commentary in the geotechnical report when geologic 
conditions or knowledge of prior site activities indicates that obstructions may be 
encountered.  Existing utility location, including physical confirmation by potholing, is 
an activity that should be completed early in design to adequately assess construction 
costs. 
• Will water be encountered in the foundation excavation?  Water can pose a problem in 
the construction of shallow foundations.  If there is a high water table, then consideration 
should be given to the stability of the bottom of the foundation soils just before the 
footing is placed.  Softening or heaving of the bottom should be prevented.  In some 
cases, dewatering and seals may be required.  The geotechnical investigation should 
identify the presence and elevation of the water table below a site.  The ground water 
conditions should be assessed at all times of the year, particularly when there is potential 
for seasonal variation of the water level. 
 

CHAPTER 4 
 
GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION 
4.1 PRELIMINARY DESIGN 
Once a bridge layout or preliminary plan of the proposed structure is available, the geotechnical 
engineer can proceed with preliminary design activities.  This process and its application are 
described in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) 
and are reiterated below.  Preliminary design activities should include a terrain reconnaissance, 
which is predominantly an office study that includes collecting and reviewing existing 
information relevant to the project area.  Sources of information include the following:  
• Topographic maps available from the U.S. Geologic Survey (USGS) or the U.S. Coast 
and Geodetic Survey 
• Geologic maps or bulletins available from the USGS or state geology agency 
• Soil survey maps available from the U.S. Department of Agriculture National 
Conservation and Resource Survey (formerly Soil Conservation Survey) 
• Well logs available from local or state water resource or protection agencies 
• Air photos available from the USGS or state or private geographic services 
• Construction records from nearby structures available from local building or highway 
jurisdictions 
The last item is becoming increasingly valuable, as highway projects are frequently located in 
congested urban and suburban environments where numerous nearby existing structures, 
especially bridges, may be located.  The geotechnical and subsurface information from the 
design and construction of these structures should be reviewed with judgment as to the reliability 
of the data, considering the methods available at the time of subsurface exploration.  In 
particular, drilling methods may have been used that disturbed the soils, thus rendering Standard 
Penetration Test (SPT) test data unreliable.  Refer to Section 4.3.1 for additional discussion on 
the performance and potential errors in the SPT test. 
The terrain reconnaissance should focus on gaining an understanding of the geologic and 
geomorphic features (landforms) likely to be present at the project site.  This information should 
be used to plan the subsurface exploration program for the site.  Once this information is 
reviewed and understood, a field reconnaissance should be scheduled with the bridge engineer 
and other members of the design team to discuss foundation type alternatives and to plan a 
29 

subsurface exploration accordingly.  Other disciplines, such as hydraulics, environmental and 
general civil engineers can also benefit from, and provide valuable input during, the site 
reconnaissance on issues that may affect foundation type selection and location (e.g, stream 
stability, environmentally sensitive areas, utility location, etc.). 
4.2 FIELD RECONNAISSANCE 
The area concept of site exploration allows the geotechnical engineer to extend the results from 
a limited number of explorations in a particular landform to the entire geologic deposit.  The area 
concept is a powerful tool in reducing subsurface exploration costs.  The application of the area 
concept is described within the context of an entire transportation project in the Soils and 
Foundations Workshop and Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) 
Application of the area concept requires the use of proper subsurface exploration equipment and 
techniques.  An adequate site investigation can be accomplished only under the direction of a 
geotechnical engineer who knows the general limitations of the exploration equipment, as well as 
the general demands of the project.  A site reconnaissance, preferably with the bridge engineer 
and other members of the design team, is recommended to assess foundation conditions, 
particularly for the purpose of foundation type selection. 
The field reconnaissance for structures should include the following: 
• Visually assess any nearby structures to determine their performance with the particular 
foundation type used.  If settlement is suspected, and the original structure plans are 
available, arrange to have the structure surveyed using the original benchmark, if 
possible, to determine the magnitude of settlement experienced.  If the structure is a 
bridge, review the bridge inspection reports and files to assess the performance history of 
the structure. 
• Visually assess the surface geology and geomorphology, including looking for evidence 
of slope instability, rock or boulder outcrops, erosion or debris deposits, pre-existing fills, 
performance of existing cut and fill slopes and ground water seepage or springs. 
• For water crossings, inspect any existing structure footings and the stream banks up- and 
downstream for evidence of scour.  Take careful note of the streambed material.  Often, 
large boulders exposed in the stream but not encountered in the borings are an indication 
of obstructions that could impact foundation construction, including shoring or 
cofferdams that may be required to construct a shallow foundation. 
• Note the location, type and depth of any existing structures or abandoned foundations that 
may infringe on the foundation for the new structure.   
• Locate subsurface and overhead utilities prior to subsurface exploration and show the 
utility locations on the bridge plans. 
• Relate site conditions to proposed site exploration operations.  Assess access for site 
exploration equipment, including the potential for problems with utilities (overhead and 
30 

underground), site access (temporary clearing or grading, and site restoration), private 
property (right-of-entry) or obstructions (natural or man-made). 
A field reconnaissance report form should be used to record observations and notes and to serve 
as a checklist of important items to note during the reconnaissance.  Figure 1 of the Soils and 
Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) is an example of a field 
reconnaissance form that may be used to record data pertinent to the site. 
Upon completion of the site reconnaissance, the geotechnical engineer should prepare a 
subsurface exploration plan or terrain reconnaissance report outlining the following: 
• General suitability of the site for the proposed construction, specifically, addressing the 
potentially stable end-slope configuration (affects bridge length) and likely foundation 
types. 
• Proposed exploration locations, equipment, required sampling intervals and standard test 
methods. 
• Potential problems that may impact construction and cost. 
• Beneficial shifts in alignment or pier location. 
• Expected subsurface conditions so that the field exploration crew can communicate early 
if the encountered conditions are different. 
• An estimate of subsurface exploration quantities, costs and time required for completion. 
This information will be used by a variety of people to help the geotechnical engineer obtain the 
minimum level of subsurface investigation needed for design.  The plan or report should be 
distributed to anyone who needs this information to proceed with their job responsibilities and 
may include the following persons or offices: 
Bridge Engineer – The findings of the terrain reconnaissance may affect the bridge layout, 
including pier location and span length, which may, in turn, affect structure type and hence 
the performance expectations of shallow foundations. 
Project Office – The design office may be requested to assist in obtaining right-of-entry 
permission and any necessary permits.  A well-prepared exploration plan that documents the 
desired access requirements and the equipment and methods proposed can aid in obtaining 
work permits or approvals for access to sensitive areas or over water.  The project office will 
also be advised of any potential impacts to construction cost or schedule that may result from 
ground conditions at the site.  This helps avert the proverbial “search for the guilty” at later 
stages of project development and construction. 
Field Exploration Crew – The exploration plan forms the basis for future communication 
between the drill crew and the geotechnical engineer.  If conditions are encountered during 
subsurface exploration that are different from those expected and described in the plan, the 
drill crew should ask the geotechnical engineer if any changes should be made to the plan. 
31 

4.3 SUBSURFACE EXPLORATIONS AND IN SITU TESTING 
The procedures employed in any subsurface exploration program are dependent on a variety of 
factors that vary from site to site.  However, the project design objectives and the expected site 
soil conditions have a major influence on the subsurface explorations.  Further, for shallow 
foundation consideration, the extent, location and sampling of subsurface materials will be 
different than if a deep foundation is anticipated.  The minimum level of subsurface exploration 
and sampling is discussed in detail in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual 
(Cheney & Chassie, 2000), in Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering, Module 1 – 
Subsurface Investigations (Arman et al., 1997), and in the Manual on Subsurface Investigations 
(AASHTO, 1988) 
4.3.1 Standard Penetration Test 
Probably the most widely used field test in the United States is the Standard Penetration Test 
(SPT).  Both AASHTO T-206 and ASTM D-1586 have standardized this test.  Despite the 
numerous drawbacks to the test that have been noted by various authors (see Cheney & Chassie, 
2000), an extensive number of correlations have been developed based on this enormous quantity 
of data.  Many of the design procedures in this Circular are based on the SPT. 
SPT testing is therefore recommended for all transportation projects due to the simplicity and 
economy of the test and the usefulness of the data obtained.  The SPT may be supplemented with 
other in situ tests as discussed in Section 4.3.3.  In the SPT test, a relative measure of soil density 
and a soil sample are obtained.  The test consists of driving the split-spoon sampler 0.46 m (18 
in) with the 63-kg (140-lb) hammer falling through a drop of 0.76 m (30 in).  The first 150-mm 
(6-in) increment is referred to as the seating load.  The sum of the next two 150 mm (6-in) 
increments is known as the Standard Penetration Value (N).  The soil sample obtained is 
disturbed but can be used for visual description and laboratory classification.  The detailed 
procedures for conducting the test, as well as for limiting the potential errors frequently 
associated with the test, are well-documented in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference 
Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) and in Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering, Module 1 
– Subsurface Investigations (Arman et al., 1997). 
The N-values of the SPT are an indication of the relative density of cohesionless soils and the 
consistency of cohesive soil.  General N-value ranges are correlated with relative density and 
consistency in Table 4-1.  It is emphasized that for gravels and clays the correlations to relative 
density and consistency are rather unreliable and should serve only as general estimates. 
The SPT N-values are also frequently used to estimate strength and compressibility 
characteristics of granular soils, especially sands.  The correlations shown in Figures 4-1 and 4-2 
can be used to estimate the friction angle of granular soils, which then can be used to calculate 
bearing capacity, as described in Chapter 5.  Note that Figure 4-1 is a function of both the N-
value and the effective overburden stress, σ′vo (see Section 4.4.2).  Therefore, the N-value used 
to enter the chart should not be corrected for overburden stress.  However, the chart assumes a 
rope and cathead operated hammer, with an assumed efficiency of about 60 percent for a 
hammer operated with two wraps of rope on the cathead. 
 
32 

TABLE 4-1: SOIL PROPERTIES CORRELATED WITH 
STANDARD PENETRATION TEST VALUES* 
Sands 
(reliable) 
Clays 
(relatively unreliable) 
Number of 
Blows per 0.3 
m (1 ft), N 
 
Relative 
Density 
Number of 
Blows per 0.3 
m ( 1 ft), N 
 
 
Consistency 
0 – 4 Very loose Below 2 Very soft 
4 – 10 Loose 2 – 4 Soft 
10 – 30 Medium 4 – 8 Medium 
30 – 50 Dense 8 – 15 Stiff 
Over 50 Very dense 15 – 30 Very stiff 
  Over 30 Hard 
*Measured with 9.5 mm (3/8 in) I.D., 51 mm (2 in) O.D. sampler driven 0.3 m 
(1 ft) by a 63-kg (140 lb) hammer falling 0.76 m (30 in) 
 
If a hammer system other than a rope and cathead is used, the N-value should be corrected to an 
efficiency of 60 percent.  The correction is as follows: 
 )(N 60%
ER N FIELD60 =   (4-1) 
where: N 60 = SPT N-value corrected for hammer efficiency 
 ER = “Energy Ratio,” the efficiency or percent of theoretical free fall energy 
delivered by the hammer system actually used 
 N FIELD = Blowcount recorded in field 
The use of automatic drop sampling hammers is increasing.  Physical measurements of the 
efficiency of these hammer systems indicate ER values in the range of 70 to 90 percent, with 80 
percent commonly assumed for correction of the N-values for automatic hammers. 
For example, if an automatic hammer with an Energy Ratio (ER) of 80 percent is used to obtain 
a field SPT blowcount (NFIELD) of 30 blows per 0.3 m (1 ft), the blowcount corrected for hammer 
efficiency is: 
40)30(60%
80% )(N 60%
ER N FIELD60 ===  
33 

 
 
1 k/ft2 = 1 ksf = 47.88 kPa 
1 ft. = 0.3 m 
Figure 4-1: Correlation Between Relative Density and SPT  
Resistance (NAVFAC, 1986a, after Gibbs & Holtz) 
34 

 
Note: Use caution in the shaded portion of the chart due to  
the potential for unreliable SPT N-values in gravels 
Figure 4-2: Correlation Between Relative Density, Material Classification and Angle of  
Internal Friction for Coarse-Grained Soils (NAVFAC, 1986a) 
4.3.2 Subsurface Exploration Program 
With regard to the scope of the subsurface program for a structure, one must carefully consider 
the small cost of a boring in relation to the foundation cost.  A 65-mm (2½-in) diameter drill hole 
will cost less than one 0.3-m (12-in) diameter pile.  Yet the knowledge gained from that boring 
will permit the use of proper design techniques that may allow the cost-effective use of shallow 
foundations and elimination of all piles for that structure.   
The number, depth, spacing and character of tests to be made in any individual exploration 
program are so dependent upon site conditions and the type of structure and its requirements that 
no rigid rules may be established.  Conceptually, the exploration program must provide sufficient 
information to allow the geotechnical engineer to assess the strength and compressibility of the 
soils within the zone of influence of the foundation.  To evaluate these design considerations, the 
geotechnical engineer will need site-specific data at each pier, abutment and retaining wall, as to 
the material type, the density or consistency of the material, and the location and depth of ground 
water. 
35 

The scale of the exploration and testing program usually depends on the importance and 
criticality of the structure, the magnitude of the loading, the availability of the budget and 
funding and the limitations of project schedule.  The exploration and testing programs for 
foundations supporting less critical structures will be less extensive than those for critical 
structures such as bridges, elevated highways or official buildings, etc.   
The following program will produce the minimum foundation data for a typical structure site.  
Soft ground conditions may require undisturbed sample explorations or in situ testing. 
1. As a minimum, advance one drill hole at each pier or abutment that measures over 9 
m (30 ft) in length.  The drill hole pattern should be staggered at the opposite ends of 
adjacent footings.  Piers or abutments over 9 m (100 ft) in length require one drill 
hole at the extremities of each element.  The drill holes should be advanced using 
techniques that will allow in situ tests to be conducted in accordance with the test 
standards and that produce a hole that is stable.  Appropriate drill techniques may 
include mud rotary with or without casing and continuous flight augers.  Cone 
penetration tests (CPT) may be substituted for drilled test holes but should not be 
relied on solely as a method of obtaining subsurface data at a given bridge site.  The 
CPT is not appropriate for all ground conditions, such as very dense soils or soil 
profiles with cobbles and boulders.  Also, the CPT recovers no samples, so soil 
descriptions are based on empirical correlations, and no soil classification is possible.  
However, the readout of data is essentially continuous, so definition of soil layers is 
better than drilling and split-spoon sampling alone. 
2. Estimate the boring depth from existing data obtained during the terrain 
reconnaissance phases in conjunction with minimum requirements that are 
established to help ensure that the borings are not terminated too soon or in a soft soil 
layer.  The borings should also extend past the estimated depth of influence (Section 
3.1.5), unless rock is encountered first.  Minimum requirements may include criteria 
such as these: 
• The borings for structure foundations shall be terminated when a minimum 
SPT resistance of 20 blows per 0.3 m (1 foot) on the sample spoon has been 
achieved for 6 continuous meters (20 feet) of drilling, or 
• The boring shall extend 3 m (10 feet) into rock having an average recovery of 
50 percent or greater. 
Such minimum criteria should be developed based on the design requirements of the 
local area and the expected subsurface conditions.  More stringent criteria, such as 
higher blows for longer depths of penetration, should be specified where high lateral 
load conditions may be present (e.g., impact or seismic loads). 
3. Obtain standard split-spoon samples at 1.5-m (5-ft) intervals or at changes in material.  
Split-spoon samples at 0.75-m (2½-ft) intervals are recommended for a minimum 4.5-
m (15-ft) zone beneath the elevation where spread footings may be placed on natural 
soil.  These spoon samples are “disturbed” samples generally not suited for laboratory 
36 

determination of strength or consolidation parameters, but they can be used for 
general index tests (e.g., moisture content, Atterberg limits and grain-size analysis).  
Undisturbed (e.g. thin-walled or Shelby tube) samples should be obtained at 1.5-m (5-
ft) intervals in at least one boring in cohesive soils.  For cohesive deposits greater 
than 9 m (30 ft) in depth, the tube sample interval can be increased to 3 m (10 ft).  In 
soft clay deposits, in situ vane shear strength tests are recommended at 1.5- to 3-m (5- 
to 10-ft) intervals for measurement of intact shearing resistance. 
4. Record the Standard Penetration Test data on each drill hole in accordance with 
ASTM D-1586.  This is the most economical method presently available for 
procuring useful data, regardless of the frequently cited drawbacks of the test. 
5. Instruct the drilling crew to perform a rough visual analysis of the soil samples and 
record all pertinent data on a standard drill log form.  The disturbed split-spoon 
samples must be carefully sealed in plastic bags, placed in jars and sent to the soil 
mechanics laboratory for analysis.  Undisturbed tube samples must be sealed and 
stored upright in a shockproof, insulated container normally constructed from 
plywood and filled with cushioning material. 
6. Observe the water level in each boring, then record the depth below the top of the 
hole and the date of the reading on the drill log for the following: 
a. Water seepage or artesian pressure encountered during drilling.  Artesian 
pressure may be measured by extending drill casing above the ground until 
flow stops.  Report the pressure as the number of meters (feet) of head above 
ground. 
b. Water level at the end of each day and at completion of boring. 
c. Water level 24 hours (minimum) after hole completion. Long-term readings 
may require installation of a perforated plastic tube before abandoning the 
hole. 
A false indication of water level may be obtained when water is used during drilling 
and adequate time is not permitted after hole completion for the water level to 
stabilize.  In low-permeability soils, such as clays, more than 1 week may be required 
to obtain accurate readings.  In this case, the boring should be completed as a 
piezometer so that water levels can be measured over time. 
The reasons for obtaining this minimum data are clear; the engineer must have adequate data to 
determine the soil type and relative density or consistency, as well as the position of the static 
water level.  Methods such as driving open-end rod without obtaining soil samples or taking 
water-level readings after the last soil sample was removed must be discouraged.  Good 
communication between the driller and the foundation engineer is essential during all phases of 
the subsurface investigation program. 
37 

4.3.3 In Situ Testing 
The SPT test is considered the minimum level of in situ testing needed to complete a foundation 
design.  Other in situ tests are available that can be employed when specific site data are desired, 
or to support the implementation of a particular type of engineering analysis.  In the design of 
shallow foundations, this may include attempts to measure compressibility characteristics of the 
soils below the footing directly. 
After the SPT, the cone penetration test (CPT) is probably the next most common in situ test 
performed to support foundation design activities.  The CPT has the advantage of collecting 
nearly continuous data as the probe is pushed into the ground.  The definition of the soil layering 
is therefore more discrete and accurate than that obtained from split-spoon sampling at 1.5-m (5-
ft) intervals.  Correlations to SPT N-values are available for interpretation of the CPT data.  
Drawbacks of the CPT include the limitation of material types that can be penetrated by the cone 
and the fact that no samples are recovered for material description or classification.  Refer to 
ASTM 3441 and “The Cone Penetrometer Test” (Riaund & Miran, 1992) for details in 
performance of the CPT and for reduction and interpretation of the data. 
Other in situ tests such as the pressuremeter test (PMT) and the flat dilatometer test can be used 
to measure the stress-strain properties of soils in situ, and have been used to predict the 
performance of shallow foundations.  Refer to “The Pressuremeter Test for Highway 
Applications” (Briaud, 1989), “The Flat Dilatometer Test” (Riaund & Miran, 1992) and 
Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering, Module 1 – Subsurface Investigations (Arman et al., 
1997) for guidance on the performance and interpretation of these tests and their results. 
Recent research by Briaud and colleagues (Briaud & Gibbens, 1994, Briaud & Gibbens, 1995, 
and Briaud et al., 2000) has resulted in development of a new method of predicting shallow 
foundation settlement as a function of applied load based on in situ data obtained directly from 
the PMT.  This procedure has potential for improving the geotechnical engineer’s ability to 
predict settlement of a spread footing, not only under ordinary working loads, but also for higher 
loads that may be transient, such as earthquake or ice loads.  The procedure and considerations 
regarding its use are presented in Section 5.3.4.3. 
4.3.4 Rock and IGM Mass Characterization 
A natural rock or intermediate geomaterial (IGM) mass is rarely a continuous, isotropic, 
homogeneous material.  It can be highly variable and may be very difficult to characterize in a 
generalized manner.  A rock mass is generally composed of intact or weathered blocks of rock 
separated by discontinuities (e.g., joints, bedding planes, sheared zones and faults).  An IGM can 
exhibit variable zones of weathering or texture.  The first step in a successful design of a footing 
on rock or IGM is to properly establish the material and discontinuity and weathering 
characteristics.  The following are important characteristics for a shallow foundation design: 
• Rock lithology (such as granite, gneiss, schist, limestone, sandstone) 
• IGM genesis (e.g., weathered in place, glacially overridden, cemented) 
• Strength properties (e.g., unconfined compressive strength, cohesion intercept, frictional 
angle) 
38 

• Deformation properties (e.g., Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio) 
• Frequency of discontinuities (e.g., RQD)  
• Spacing (S) of discontinuities (especially with respect to foundation width) 
• Orientation of discontinuities (e.g. strike and dip, or dip and dip direction) 
• Aperture, filling, and condition (open or closed) of discontinuities 
• Degrees of weathering 
• Ground water condition 
To establish the above rock or IGM mass characteristics, the following exploration and testing 
methods as described in detail in various chapters of Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering, 
Module 1 – Subsurface Investigations (Arman et al., 1997) should be employed with proper 
planning: 
• Field reconnaissance 
• Geological mapping 
• Drilling/coring 
• Test excavation/test trench, if feasible 
• In situ testing (see Table 4-2) 
• Geophysical methods (see Table 4-2) 
• Field load testing (see Table 4-2) 
• Laboratory testing (see Table 4-2) 
In addition, Module 5, “Rock Slopes” (Wyllie & Mah, 1998) includes detailed descriptions of 
geological mapping.  In this Circular, Table 4-2 summarizes the characteristics of interest and 
available in situ and laboratory tests (after Corps of Engineer Manual EM 1110-1-2908).  Note 
that not all of these tests will be applicable or feasible for all rock and IGM types.  Some are 
applicable for stronger and stiffer materials (e.g., borehole jacking, unconfined compression), 
while others can yield useful design information for weaker and softer IGMs (e.g., 
pressuremeter, dilatometer). 
It is common for a geotechnical engineer to provide design recommendations for a footing on 
rock or IGM based on limited data including rock type, core description, percentage of core 
recovery, Rock Quality Designation (RQD) values, and unconfined compressive strength.  This 
information should be combined with the local geological knowledge, experience and judgment 
of the geotechnical engineer to develop the foundation recommendations. 
4.4 LABORATORY TESTING 
To develop a laboratory testing program that will provide data useful in design, it is important to 
test the sample under conditions that either exist currently in the ground or that will occur as a 
result of shallow foundation construction and loading.  This means that the stress conditions, 
moisture states and load paths imposed on the representative soil sample in the laboratory should 
match the conditions that will be experienced by the material in the field.  A detailed discussion 
of laboratory testing procedures is not presented here.  However, the basic concepts of laboratory 
testing of soils to determine strength and deformation characteristics are reviewed, beginning 
with a discussion of the phase relationships of the constituents of soil, continuing with an  
39 

TABLE 4-2: SUMMARY OF COMMONLY USED IN SITU AND LABORATORY  
TESTING FOR FOOTINGS ON ROCK OR IGMS (AFTER ARMAN ET AL., 1997) 
Purposes Types of In Situ/Field Tests Types of Laboratory Tests 
Shear Strength Pressuremeter 
Borehole shear test 
Torsional shear test 
Uniaxial compression 
Triaxial compression 
Direct shear 
Point load 
Tensile Strength  Direct tensile strength 
Split strength (Brazilian 
tensile strength tests) 
Bearing Capacity 
 
Plate bearing load test (Same as shear strength) 
Deformability Pressuremeter 
Dilatometer 
Borehole jacking 
Seismic refraction survey 
• Cross-hole 
• Down-hole 
Plate bearing load test 
Deformation moduli from:  
• Uniaxial compression 
• Triaxial compression 
Swell 
Creep 
Discontinuity Study Geologic mapping 
Geophysical methods 
• Seismic refraction 
• Ground penetrating radar 
• Electrical resistivity 
Visual observation 
Durability  Slake durability 
Freezing and thawing 
Void/Sinkhole Detection Ground penetrating radar 
Electrical resistivity imaging 
Microgravity 
 
Rock Anchor (Uplift 
Resistance) 
Anchor pull test  
Note: See Module 1, “Subsurface Investigation” (Arman et al., 1997), for detailed descriptions of each testing 
procedure. 
explanation of the principle of effective stress (which is used throughout this Circular), and 
finishing with a discussion of common laboratory tests used to determine the strength and 
deformation characteristics of soil. 
4.4.1 Phase and Volume Relationships 
Soil particles are irregularly shaped solids that are in contact with adjacent soil particles.  The 
weight and volume of a soil sample depends on the specific gravity (ratio of the density of the 
soil particles to the density of water) of the soil particles (solids), the size of the space between 
40 

soil particles (void or pore space), and the amount of the void space filled with water (pore 
water). 
Soil is therefore usually a three-phase material (solid, water and gas), as shown in Figure 4-3.  
The proportion of the various phases, in terms of both weight and volume, can be represented 
schematically with the aid of the block diagram shown in Figure 4-3. 
 
Air
Water
Solid
WeightVolume
V
VV
VW
VS
VA 0
WW
WS
W
 
Note: Subscript s stands for solids, w for water, a for air and v for 
voids (the space between soil solids or alternatively, the air 
and water volumes combined).  No subscripts are used 
relative to weight W and volume V of the entire soil mass. 
Figure 4-3: Phase Relation Block Diagram 
Relative to the block diagram, there are a number of weight-volume or phase relationships (i.e., 
ratios) that are useful in geotechnical engineering and are essential values or parameters used in 
laboratory testing.   
These relationships are summarized in Table 4-3. 
Of particular note is the void ratio, e, which is a general indicator of the relative strength and 
compressibility of a soil sample.  Low void ratios generally indicate strong, incompressible soils, 
and high void ratios may indicate weak, compressible soils. 
When a load is applied to a soil sample, the deformation that occurs will depend on the forces 
between the soil particles that are in contact with each other (intergranular forces) and the 
amount of water in the void space (pore water).  Dry soils with no pore water in the void space 
will deform by a combination of sliding between the soil particles and deformation or crushing 
of the particles themselves.  Intergranular sliding accounts for most of the deformation that 
occurs as the particles move to increase the contact area between the particles to support the 
increase in load. 
 
41 

TABLE 4-3: WEIGHT-VOLUME RELATIONSHIPS, DIMENSIONLESS  
RATIOS AND FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 
Unit weight 
General definition  
V
W=γ  (4-2) 
where: γ  = unit weight (F/L3) 
 W = weight, units of force, F 
 V = Volume, units of length cubed, L3 
Unit weight of saturated soil is also: 
V
W
sat =γ  (4-3) 
Unit weight of soil solids 
S
S
S V
W=γ  (4-4) 
Unit weight of water 
W
W
w V
W=γ   (4-5) 
= 9.8 kN/m3 (62.4 pcf) 
Dry unit weight 
V
WSd =γ  (4-6) 
the ratio of the weight of soil solids (only), 
WS, to the total volume V 
Buoyant (or submerged) unit weight 
V
'W'=γ  (4-7) 
wsat' γ−γ=γ  (4-8) 
where W' is the buoyant weight of the soil 
mass upon complete submergence in water, 
i.e., W' = W- wγ V 
 
Dimensionless ratios 
Specific gravity of soil solids 
W
S
S γG γ=  (4-9) 
Void ratio (a ratio of volumes, void vs. solid) 
S
V
V
Ve =  (4-10) 
Porosity (a ratio of volumes, void vs. total) 
V
Vn V=  (4-11) 
Water content (a ratio of weights, water vs. 
solid) 
S
W
W
Ww =  (4-12) 
Degree of saturation  
V
W
V
VS =  (4-13) 
Functional relationships 
SwGSe =  (4-14) 
e1
en += ; 
n1
ne −=  (4-15) 
( )
e1
SeG WS
+
γ+=γ  (4-16) 
e1
WSd +=γ G γ  (4-17) 
w1d +
γ=γ  (4-18) 
w1
WWS +=  (4-19) 
( )
e1
1G' WS
+
γ−=γ   (4-20) 
 
42 

Because water is essentially incompressible, the water contained in the pore space of soils that 
are saturated (i.e., pore spaces completely filled with water) is also a function of the ability for 
water to be expelled from the pore space.  The permeability of a soil is a measure of the speed 
with which water molecules can pass through the pore space.  The lower the permeability of a 
soil sample, the longer it takes for water to be expelled from the pore space.  If a load is applied 
quickly to a soil sample with low permeability, the pore water will initially carry the load until 
the water drains from the pore space and the soil particles begin to slide and accept the load.  
While the load is still carried by the pore water, the water will experience increased, or excess, 
pore-water pressure.  As the excess pore-water pressure dissipates, the soil sample will deform 
into a smaller volume and a denser configuration.  This process is termed “consolidation.” 
The consolidation of soil may be explained by the spring analogy shown in Figure 4-4.  The 
ability of the intergranular contact areas to carry load is represented by the spring.  The valve 
represents the permeability of the soil.  The water inside the piston chamber and surrounding the 
spring is analogous to the pore water filling the pore space of the soil sample. 
 
Figure 4-4: Spring Analogy as Applied to Consolidation (Holtz and Kovacs, 1981) 
A load is applied to the piston with the valve closed (Figure 4-4a).  With the valve closed, the 
incompressible water cannot be expelled, and the spring is unable to compress to accept an 
increase in load.  Essentially the entire applied load is resisted by an increase in fluid pressure 
within the chamber (i.e., excess pore-water pressure). 
When the valve is opened, water will begin to escape through the valve (Figure 4-4b).  As water 
escapes, the spring shortens and begins to carry an increasing proportion of the applied load.  
There is a corresponding decrease in the fluid pressure within the fluid chamber.  Eventually, a 
condition is reached (Figure 4-4c) in which the entire applied load is carried by the spring, and 
the pressure in the water has returned to its initial state, termed the “hydrostatic condition.”  
Once this stage is reached, there is no further flow of water, the spring no longer continues to 
compress and there is no more reduction in the volume of the chamber. 
43 

4.4.2 Principle of Effective Stress 
The consolidation process demonstrates the important principle of effective stress.  Under an 
applied load, the total stress in a saturated soil sample is composed of two parts.  One part acts in 
the water and the soil in all directions with equal intensity.  This part is termed the “pore-water 
pressure” (or neutral stress).  The other part acts solely between the areas of soil particle contact 
and is termed the “intergranular stress.”  Because the pore water has no shear strength and is 
essentially incompressible, only the intergranular stress is effective in resisting shearing or 
limiting compression of the soil.  The intergranular stress is therefore called the “effective 
stress.”  The effective stress is the portion of the total stress over and above the pore-water 
pressure and can therefore be represented mathematically by Equation 4-21. 
σ′ = σ – u (4-21) 
Where σ is the total stress, u is the pore water pressure, and σ′ is the effective stress. 
Changes in the effective stress control the volumetric strain that develops in a soil.  For instance, 
consider the load applied to a soil specimen by a laboratory oedometer as shown in Figure 4-5.  
The saturated specimen of clay can be compressed when sufficient pressure is applied to the soil 
skeleton to develop vertical deformations.  However, essentially zero volume change occurs if 
the soil is loaded quickly – zero change in the volume of the voids (VV = VW).  The water 
pressure increases by approximately the same amount as the total stress increases, while the 
effective stress does not initially change.  If the load is maintained for a sufficient period of time, 
water will be squeezed out of the soil through the porous stones, and the increase in pore-water 
pressure will slowly dissipate until it is zero.  After the excess pore water pressure has dissipated, 
the effective stress in the soil sample will be equal to the new total stress (note that in the 
oedometer the hydrostatic water pressure is negligible).   
 
Soil Specimen
Porous Stone
Loading Plate
Base
Porous Stone
Floating
Ring
Load
 
Figure 4-5: Conceptual Arrangement of Laboratory Oedometer Test 
44 

4.4.3 Overburden Stress 
As mentioned in the introduction to this section, the laboratory testing required to solve soil-
related problems involves simulating the conditions that exist naturally in the ground.  Soils 
existing at a distance below the ground surface are influenced by the weight of the soil above 
that depth.  The weight of the overlying soil exerts a pressure on the soil at that depth.  This 
pressure is called the “overburden stress” and is a function of the unit weight of the overlying 
soil and the depth to the point under consideration.  When a soil sample is removed from depth, 
the state of stress is relieved as all weight confining the sample is removed.  When conducting a 
test on the sample, it is important to reestablish the state of stress in the soil sample that existed 
prior to removal of the sample from the ground.  Changing the state of stress on the sample and 
observing the resulting strain can then provide information useful in design.  The changes in 
stress that are applied to the sample should be representative of the changes in stress that are 
expected to occur as a result of constructing the shallow foundation upon the soil.  As discussed, 
the effective stress resulting from intergranular contact is the controlling factor in evaluating the 
shearing resistance and compression characteristics of the soil sample. 
Before requesting laboratory testing of soil samples, the engineer must estimate the total and 
effective stress resulting from overburden at the depth of sampling.  The total or effective stress 
overburden stress is specified to the lab as the beginning stress state for a particular test. 
The total overburden stress is computed by summing the product of the total unit weight of the 
soil times the layer thickness.  The soil can be broken into stratigraphic layers if the unit weight 
varies with depth.  Unit weight may be determined from undisturbed samples or estimated from 
SPT N-values, soil descriptions and moisture-content data.  A plot of total stress and effective 
stress with depth is extremely useful and should be plotted for each foundation location under 
consideration.  The plot can be constructed as follows: 
1. Divide the subsurface profile into layers based on the soil stratigraphy.  Layers should be 
selected based on material description or classification, the location of the ground water 
table, changes in soil unit weight and increments of about one-half the estimated footing 
width for a distance of about twice the footing width below the estimated bearing depth. 
2. Determine the total vertical stress at the mid-point and bottom of each layer or sub-layer 
by multiplying the total unit weight by the thickness of each respective soil layer above 
the depth of calculation. 
3. Determine the pore water pressures below the water table by multiplying the depth below 
the water table to the point of calculation by the unit weight of water (  = 9.81 kN/mwγ
3 
= 62.4 pcf). 
4. Calculate the effective vertical stress by subtracting the pore water pressure from the total 
stress at each point below the water table. 
5. Plot the calculated total and effective vertical stresses versus depth or elevation. 
45 

46 
The initial stress for laboratory tests can be read easily from this plot, which also will be used 
throughout the design of a shallow foundation. 
Laboratory testing to determine the shearing resistance and compression characteristics of soils is 
relatively expensive and time consuming.  The engineer should consider the cost and time 
required to perform such tests relative to the benefit achieved in terms of reduced foundation cost 
that results from an optimized design.  In many cases, footings on cohesionless soils can be 
designed safely and effectively using shear strength and compressibility correlations based on the 
SPT N-values, as described in Chapter 5. 
Cohesive soils, however, can exhibit both low-strength and high-compressibility characteristics 
that are not reliably reflected in the SPT N-values.  Consolidation testing is usually essential to 
predict the settlement of a shallow footing founded on cohesive soils.  Shear-strength testing of 
cohesive soils should also be considered if a bearing failure mechanism could develop under the 
footing. 
 

CHAPTER 5 
 
GEOTECHNICAL DESIGN 
The design of shallow foundations involves calculating an allowable bearing pressure that will 
(a) maintain an adequate factor of safety relative to shear failure of the bearing soil, and (b) limit 
the settlement of the foundation to meet serviceability requirements.  The allowable bearing 
capacity of a shallow foundation is defined as the lesser of: 
• The pressure that will result in a shear failure divided by a suitable factor of safety (FS), 
or  
• The pressure that results in a specified limiting amount of settlement.   
This chapter presents and discusses the theory behind calculation of allowable bearing capacities, 
considering both of these important design requirements. 
This chapter also presents the geotechnical procedures for computing the resistance to sliding for 
a shallow foundation, and the geotechnical considerations needed to ensure the foundation is 
stable from a global, or slope stability, perspective. 
5.1 ALLOWABLE BEARING CAPACITY 
The allowable bearing capacity of a spread footing historically has combined the design 
considerations of minimizing the potential for shear failure of the soil and limiting vertical 
deflection (settlement).  Both of these design considerations are a function of the least footing 
dimension, typically called the “footing width,” and designated as the variable, B or Bf.  In 
general, for a footing bearing on essentially an isotropic, homogenous material, with no 
embedment (i.e., founded at the surface), the factor of safety against a shear failure developing 
beneath the footing will increase as the footing width, B, increases.  However, as a footing’s 
dimension increases, the depth of influence also increases.  Stated another way, as the footing 
dimension, B, increases, the stress increase “felt” by the soil extends more deeply below the 
bearing elevation. 
The effect of footing width on bearing capacity and settlement is shown conceptually in Figure 
5-1.  Note that the allowable bearing capacity of a footing is controlled by shear-failure 
considerations for narrow footing widths.  But as the footing width increases, the allowable 
bearing capacity is limited by the settlement potential of the soils supporting the footing. 
47 

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
Footing Width, B (m)
Bearing Pressure (kPa) 
Allowable Bearing Capacity (FS = 3.0)
Bearing Pressure for 25-mm (1 in) Settlement
Shear failure
controls
Settlement
controls
 
Figure 5-1: Allowable Bearing Capacity Controlled by Shear Failure  
Considerations versus Settlement Considerations 
5.2 BEARING CAPACITY THEORY 
This section discusses bearing capacity theory and its application toward computing allowable 
bearing capacities for shallow foundations.  Methods of calculating settlement displacements are 
presented in Section 5.3. 
When a load is transferred through a footing to the foundation soil/rock, the subsurface materials 
experience settlement due to elastic (immediate) strains and long-term consolidation (elastic 
and/or plastic deformation) of the ground.  The footing will penetrate into the foundation 
soil/rock when the intensity of applied loads is such that the load-carrying capacity of the 
foundation material is exceeded.  A foundation failure will occur when the footing penetrates 
excessively into the ground or experiences excessive rotation (Figure 5-2).  Excessive foundation 
movements such as penetration and rotation of the foundation may cause structural damage or 
collapse.  A failure caused by the vertical and lateral displacement of foundation soils due 
to lack of sufficient strength is called a “bearing capacity failure.”  The load that develops 
this type of subsurface collapse is called the “ultimate bearing capacity” of the soil. 
 
48 

 
Figure 5-2: Bearing Capacity Failure of Silo Foundation  
(Vesic, 1975, from Tschebotarioff, 1951) 
5.2.1 Failure Mechanisms 
5.2.1.1 General Shear 
The kinematic conditions (strain states) that develop when a uniform, rigid-plastic, weightless 
soil (possessing cohesion c' and friction φ') reaches the ultimate bearing capacity were 
determined theoretically by Prandtl (1920) and Reissner (1924). When a footing is loaded to the 
ultimate bearing capacity, the condition of plastic flow of foundation soils develops. 
Terzaghi and Peck (1948) further defined the zones of plastic equilibrium after failure of soil 
beneath continuous footing (Figure 5-3).  As shown in Figure 5-3, a triangular wedge beneath the 
footing, designated as Zone I, remains in an elastic state and moves down into the soil with the 
footing.  Radial shear develops in Zone II such that radial lines extending from the footing 
change length based on a logarithmic spiral until the failure plane reaches Zone III.  A passive 
state develops in Zone III at an angle of 45o – (φ′/2) from the horizontal.  This configuration of 
the ultimate bearing capacity failure, with well-defined shear planes developing and extending to 
the surface, with footing rotation, and bulging of the soil on both sides of the footing, is called 
“general shear.”  General shear-type ultimate bearing capacity failures (Figure 5-4a) are believed 
to be the prevailing mode of failure for soils that are relatively incompressible and reasonably 
strong, or saturated, normally consolidated clays that are loaded rapidly so that undrained 
conditions and therefore undrained soil strength governs (Coduto, 1994). 
49 

II
I III
DC
A EB
Q
L = ∞ q
ψ
 
Figure 5-3: Boundaries of Zone of Plastic Equilibrium after Failure of  
Soil Beneath Continuous Footing 
 
(a) GENERAL SHEAR
(b) LOCAL SHEAR
(c) PUNCHING SHEAR
LOAD
SETTLEMENT
LOAD
SETTLEMENT
LOAD
SETTLEMENT
SURFACE TEST
TEST AT
GREATER
DEPTH
 
Figure 5-4: Modes of Bearing Capacity Failure (After Vesic, 1975)  
(a) General Shear (b) Local Shear (c) Punching Shear 
50 

5.2.1.2 Local Shear 
In some cases, the bearing capacity shear planes are not well developed, and the failure planes do 
not extend all the way to the ground surface.  This mode of ultimate bearing capacity failure 
(Figure 5-4b) is called “local shear.”  The deformation patterns in local shear involve vertical 
compression (Vesic, 1975) beneath the footing, bulging of the soil at the ground surface and 
essentially no rotation or tilting of the footing.  Local shear failures may occur in soils that are 
relatively loose or soft when compared to soils susceptible to general shear failure. 
5.2.1.3 Punching Shear 
Another type of failure observed under ultimate bearing-capacity conditions involves vertical 
compression of the soils beneath the footing without bulging of the soil.  As shown in Figure  
5-4c, the bearing load continuously increases when the footing is loaded under strain-controlled 
conditions (‘test at greater depth’).  This kinematic mode of ultimate bearing capacity failure is 
called “punching shear.”  Punching shear is considered a potential failure mode for shallow 
foundations when loose or compressible soils are loaded slowly under drained conditions.  For 
instance, footings placed at great depth on dense sand or on dense sand underlain by soft, 
compressible soil can fail under punching-shear modes.  A footing on soft clay can also fail 
under punching shear if it is loaded slowly. 
Note that from a perspective of bridge foundation design, soils so obviously weak as to 
experience local or punching shear failure modes should be avoided for supporting shallow 
foundations.  Additional guidance on dealing with soils that fall in the intermediate, or local 
shear range of behavior is provided in Section 5.2.3.6. 
5.2.2 Bearing Capacity Equation Formulations 
The gross ultimate bearing pressure is equivalent to the stress applied to the soil by the footing at 
ultimate (failure) conditions at the bearing elevation.  In theoretical formulations, Prandtl (1920) 
and Reissner (1924) developed an expression for the gross ultimate bearing capacity that 
considered both frictional and cohesion components of soil shear strength and a uniform 
surcharge pressure at the base of the footing due to the depth of embedment of the footing, Df.  
The gross ultimate bearing pressure (qult gross) for this case is: 
qult gross = c  (5-1)  )N ( q  )N( qc +
where: c = cohesion of the soil 
 q = γDf  = surcharge at the base of the footing 
 γ = Unit weight of the overburden material causing the surcharge pressure 
 D f = Depth of embedment (Figure 5-5) 
 N q = bearing capacity factor for the surcharge term: 
 = )2(45  tan 2 tane φ+°φπ  (5-2) 
 
51 

Lf
Df
Bf
 
Figure 5-5: Design Terminology for Spread Footing Foundation 
Nc = bearing capacity factor for the cohesion term: 
 = °>φφ 0for1)cotq -(N  (5-3) 
 = °=φ=π+ 52  (5-4) 0for14.
The net ultimate bearing pressure is the difference between the gross ultimate bearing pressure 
and the pressure that existed due to the surcharge at the bearing depth before the footing was 
constructed, q (= γDf).  The net ultimate bearing pressure can thus be computed by subtracting 
the surcharge (q) from Equation 5-1:   
qult net = qult gross – q (5-5) 
qult net =  (5-6)  1)-N ( q  N c qc +
By inspection of Equation 5-6, the actual difference between qult net and qult gross is generally small 
for cohesionless soils (i.e.,  > 0φ o).   
52 

Further, the structural designer will typically include the self-weight of the concrete footing and 
the backfill over the footing (approximately equal to γ Df) in the loads that contribute to the 
applied bearing stress.  Therefore, if the geotechnical engineer computes and reports a net 
ultimate bearing pressure, the effect of the surcharge directly over the footing area is counted 
twice.  This is conservative, but generally not recommended, provided that a suitable factor of 
safety is maintained against bearing capacity failure.  If the geotechnical engineer chooses to 
report an allowable bearing capacity computed from a net ultimate bearing pressure, this fact 
should be clearly stated in the foundation report. 
Therefore, it is recommended that qult gross be used in determination of the allowable 
bearing capacity of a soil (e.g., qult ≈ qult gross).   
There are no analytical solutions available to extend the bearing capacity equations to include the 
effects of unit weight of the foundation material.  Numerous investigators have proposed 
relationships for the inclusion of the unit weight.  They involve adding an independent term (Nγ) 
to the ultimate gross bearing capacity equation.  Analyses were developed by assuming the 
shapes of the failure surfaces and performing trial analyses until a solution was obtained.  The 
revised ultimate gross bearing capacity equation for a centrically loaded strip footing on a 
foundation material with unit weight now becomes: 
qult = c ))(N)(B( 0.5  )(N q  )(N fqc γγ++   (5-7) 
where: c = cohesion of the soil 
 N c = bearing capacity factor for the cohesion term 
 q = surcharge at the base of the footing 
 N q = bearing capacity factor for the surcharge term 
 B f  = footing width 
 γ = unit weight of soil beneath the footing 
 N γ = bearing capacity factor for soil unit weight 
Note that a range of values has been proposed by various authors for Nγ.  The differences 
reported by various researchers range from about one-half to double the values presented below, 
depending on the friction angle selected for design (Chen & McCarron, 1991).  Caquot and 
Kerisel’s (1948) equation for Nγ is currently used by FHWA and AASHTO: 
Nγ = 2 (Nq + 1) tan( φ ) (5-8) 
The values of Nc, Nq, and Nγ as functions of the friction angle are included in Table 5-1 and in 
Figure 5-6. 
Note from Equation 5-7 that the ultimate bearing capacity of a soil is a function of the cohesive 
and frictional strength of the soil (c and φ ), the effective weight of the soil above and below the 
footing (γ or γ′), and the depth and width of the footing (Df and Bf).  Consider now the effect 
each of these variables has on the computed ultimate bearing capacity.  For cohesive soils (i.e., 
, undrained loading), the last term is zero and the first term is a constant.  Therefore the 0=φ
53 

ultimate bearing capacity will only be a function of the cohesion and the depth of embedment of 
the footing. 
Cohesionless soils, on the other hand, will experience large changes in ultimate bearing capacity 
when properties and/or dimensions are changed.  The embedment effect is particularly important.  
Removal of soil from over an embedded footing, either by excavation or scour, can substantially 
reduce bearing capacity and cause footing subsidence.  Similarly, a rise in the ground water level 
to the ground surface will reduce the effective (buoyant) unit weight of the soil, thus reducing 
those terms that are a function of unit weight by essentially one-half. 
 
TABLE 5-1: BEARING CAPACITY FACTORS (AASHTO, 1996) 
φ Nc Nq Nγ φ Nc Nq Nγ 
0 5.14 1.0 0.0 23 18.1 8.7 8.2 
1 5.4 1.1 0.1 24 19.3 9.6 9.4 
2 5.6 1.2 0.2 25 20.7 10.7 10.9 
3 5.9 1.3 0.2 26 22.3 11.9 12.5 
4 6.2 1.4 0.3 27 23.9 13.2 14.5 
5 6.5 1.6 0.5 28 25.8 14.7 16.7 
6 6.8 1.7 0.6 29 27.9 16.4 19.3 
7 7.2 1.9 0.7 30 30.1 18.4 22.4 
8 7.5 2.1 0.9 31 32.7 20.6 26.0 
9 7.9 2.3 1.0 32 35.5 23.2 30.2 
10 8.4 2.5 1.2 33 38.6 26.1 35.2 
11 8.8 2.7 1.4 34 42.2 29.4 41.1 
12 9.3 3.0 1.7 35 46.1 33.3 48.0 
13 9.8 3.3 2.0 36 50.6 37.8 56.3 
14 10.4 3.6 2.3 37 55.6 42.9 66.2 
15 11.0 3.9 2.7 38 61.4 48.9 78.0 
16 11.6 4.3 3.1 39 67.9 56.0 92.3 
17 12.3 4.8 3.5 40 75.3 64.2 109.4 
18 13.1 5.3 4.1 41 83.9 73.9 130.2 
19 13.9 5.8 4.7 42 93.7 85.4 155.6 
20 14.8 6.4 5.4 43 105.1 99.0 186.5 
21 15.8 7.1 6.2 44 118.4 115.3 224.6 
22 16.9 7.8 7.1 45 133.9 134.9 271.8 
 
54 

1
10
100
1000
0 10 203 0 405 0
Friction Angle, degrees
Bearing Capacity Factor
60
s
Nc
NγNq
 
Figure 5-6: Bearing Capacity Factors versus Friction  
Angle (AASHTO, 1996) 
5.2.3 Bearing Capacity Correction Factors 
A number of factors influence the ultimate bearing capacity of shallow foundations that were not 
included in the derivations discussed earlier.  Note that Equation 5-7 assumes a rigid strip 
(continuous) footing that is loaded through its centroid bearing on a level surface of 
homogeneous soil.  Various correction factors have been proposed by numerous investigators to 
account for footing shape, location of the ground water table, embedment depth, sloping ground 
surface, an inclined base, the mode of shear (local or punching shear), inclined loading and soil 
compressibility.  The general philosophy of correcting the ultimate bearing capacity involves 
using semi-empirical factors that are multiplied by each of the three terms in the bearing capacity 
equation to account for the particular effect.  Each correction factor includes a subscript denoting 
the term to which the factor should be applied: “c” for the cohesion term, “γ” for the unit weight 
(footing width) term and “q” for the surcharge (embedment) term.  Each of these factors and 
suggestions for their application are discussed separately below.  In some, but not all, cases these 
factors should be used in combination.  The following sections provide guidance on the use of 
the factors, and whether or not certain factors should be used in combination. 
5.2.3.1 Footing Shape 
AASHTO guidelines distinguish a strip footing as one whose length (Lf) exceeds five times the 
footing width (Bf).  Corrections of the ultimate bearing capacity should be made for rectangular 
footings with Lf/Bf ratios less than 5.  The shape (eccentricity) correction factors are summarized 
in Table 5-2.  Note that for eccentrically loaded footings, AASHTO (1996) recommends using 
the effective footing dimensions, B′f and L′f, to compute the shape correction factors (refer to 
Section 6.4.1 for discussion of eccentricity and effective footing dimensions).  However, in 
55 

routine foundation design, this is not practical, since the effective dimensions will change for 
various load cases, and the difference in the computed shape correction factors will generally be 
small.  Therefore the geotechnical engineer should make reasonable assumptions about the 
footing shape and dimensions and compute the correction factors using Table 5-2. 
TABLE 5-2: SHAPE CORRECTION FACTORS (AASHTO 1996) 
 
Factor 
Friction 
Angle 
 
Cohesion Term (sc) 
 
Unit Weight Term (sγ)
 
Surcharge Term (sq) 
φ = 0 




+
f
f
L5
B1  1.0 1.0 Shape 
Factors, 
sc, sγ, sq φ > 0 










+
c
q
f
f
N
N
L
B1  




−
f
f
L
B4.01  




 φ+ tanL
B1
f
f  
Note: Shape (eccentricity) factors, s, should not be applied simultaneously with inclined loading  
factors, i.  See Section 5.2.3.7. 
 
5.2.3.2 Location of the Ground Water Table 
If the ground water table is located within the potential zone of shear below or above a footing, 
effective stresses will control the magnitude of overburden stress and thus the shearing resistance 
along that portion of the shearing surface that lies below the water table. 
A simplified method for accounting for the reduction in shearing resistance is to apply factors to 
the two terms in the bearing capacity equation that include a unit weight term.  Recall that the 
cohesion term is neither a function of soil unit weight nor effective stress.  The factors may be 
computed using the following equations, or by interpolating values between those provided in 
Table 5-3. 
0.1DB5.1
D5.05.0C
ff
WW ≤





++=γ   (5-9) 
0.1D
D5.05.0C
f
WWq ≤




+=  (5-10) 
56 

TABLE 5-3: CORRECTION FACTOR FOR LOCATION 
OF GROUND WATER TABLE (AASHTO, 1998) 
Depth of Ground Water 
Table, DW CWγ CWq 
0 0.5 0.5 
Df 0.5 1.0 
> 1.5Bf + Df 1.0 1.0 
Note: For intermediate positions of the ground water table, interpolate 
between the values shown above or use Equations 5-9 and 5-10. 
5.2.3.3 Embedment Depth 
Because the surcharge term, q, was developed considering the effect on bearing capacity as a 
vertical pressure applied at the footing bearing elevation, the effect of the shearing resistance as 
the failure surface passes through the footing embedment cover was neglected in the theory.  If 
the backfill or cover over the footing is known to be of high-quality, compacted granular material 
that can be reliably assumed to remain in place over the life of the footing, this additional 
shearing resistance can be included by addition of the embedment depth factor, dq, shown in 
Table 5-4.  Otherwise, the depth correction factor can be conservatively omitted. 
TABLE 5-4: DEPTH CORRECTION FACTOR 
(BRINCH HANSEN, 1970) 
Friction Angle, φ 
(degrees) Df/Bf dq 
32 
1 
2 
4 
8 
1.20 
1.30 
1.35 
1.40 
37 
1 
2 
4 
8 
1.20 
1.25 
1.30 
1.35 
42 
1 
2 
4 
8 
1.15 
1.20 
1.25 
1.30 
Note: The depth correction factor should be used only when 
the soils above the footing bearing elevation are as competent 
as the soils beneath the footing level; otherwise, the depth 
correction factor should be taken as 1.0. 
57 

5.2.3.4 Sloping Ground Surface 
Placement of footings on or adjacent to slopes requires that the designer perform calculations to 
ensure that both the bearing capacity and the overall slope stability are acceptable.  The bearing 
capacity equation should include corrections recommended by AASHTO as adapted from 
NAVFAC (1986b) to design the footings.  Calculation of overall, or global, stability is discussed 
in Section 5.5. 
The ultimate bearing capacity equation (Equation 5-7) is therefore modified to include terms Ncq 
and Nγq that replace the Nc and Nγ terms (Equation 5-11). 
))(N)(B( 0.5 )(N c q qfcqult γγ+=  (5-11) 
Charts are provided (Figure 5-7) to determine these terms for cohesive (φ = 0o) and cohesionless 
(c = 0) soils.  Note in Figure 5-7d that beyond a distance, ‘b,’ of two to six times the foundation 
width, the bearing capacity is independent of the slope angle (identical to the horizontal ground 
surface).  Also note that the depth of embedment term goes to zero because the surcharge effect 
on the slope side of the footing should be ignored. 
Other forms of the equation are available for cohesive soils (φ = 0o).  However, because footings 
located on both cohesive soils and near slopes are likely to have design limitations due to either 
settlement or slope stability, or both, the presentation of these equations is omitted here.  The 
reader is referred to the NHI Shallow Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Munfahk et al., 
2000) or the NAVFAC DM-7 (1986a, 1986b) manuals for discussion of these equations and their 
applications and limitations. 
The form of the equation that includes the width term on cohesionless soils is useful in designing 
footings constructed within bridge approach fills.  The calculation procedure is as follows: 
• Obtain Nγq from Figure 5-7(c) or 5-7(f) and compute the ultimate bearing capacity using 
Equation 5-11, or the general form of the bearing capacity expression, Equation 5-14, with 
the Nγ term replaced by Nγq. 
5.2.3.5 Inclined Base 
In general, inclined footings for bridges should be avoided, or limited to shallow inclinations, α, 
of less than about 8 to 10 degrees from horizontal.  Steeper inclinations may require keys, dowels 
or anchors to provide sufficient resistance to sliding.  If the footing is inclined to the horizontal, 
the bearing capacity equation should be modified using the factors as determined from Table 5-5. 
 
58 

 
 
Figure 5-7: Modified Bearing Capacity Factors for Footing on Sloping Ground,  
(after Meyerhof, 1957, from AASHTO, 1996) 
59 

TABLE 5-5: INCLINED BASE CORRECTION FACTOR (BRINCH HANSEN, 1970) 
 
Factor 
Friction 
Angle 
 
Cohesion Term (c) Unit Weight Term (γ)
 
Surcharge Term (q) 
 bc bγ bq 
φ = 0 



 α− 3.1471  1.0 1.0 
Base 
Inclination 
Factors, 
bc, bγ, bq φ > 0 





φ
−
− tanN
b1
b
c
q
q  (1-0.017α tanφ)2 (1-0.017α tanφ)2 
Definitions: φ = friction angle, degrees; α = footing inclination from horizontal, upward +, degrees 
5.2.3.6 Local or Punching Shear 
Several references, including AASHTO, recommend reducing the soil strength parameters if 
local or punching shear failure modes can develop.  Figure 5-8 shows conditions when these 
modes can develop.  The recommended reductions are shown in Equations 5-12 and 5-13. 
c67.0*c =   (5-12) 
) (0.67tan tan* 1 φ=φ −  (5-13) 
 
Note: This chart was developed for normally consolidated native soil deposits. 
Figure 5-8: Modes of Failure of Model Footings in Sand (after Vesic, 1975) 
60 

Soil types that can develop local or punching shear failure modes include loose sands, very 
sensitive clays [St > 8, sensitivity is defined as the ratio of the unconfined compressive strengths 
of an undisturbed sample to the unconfined compressive strength of a remolded sample 
(Terzaghi & Peck, 1967)], metastable (collapsible, see Section 3.1.1) sands and silts and brittle 
clays (OCR > 4 to 8; see Section 5.3.3 for discussion of OCR).  These are all “problem” soil 
conditions that should be identified with a thorough geotechnical investigation, as described in 
Chapter 4.  In general, these problem soils will have other characteristics that make them 
unsuitable for support of shallow foundations for bridges, including large settlement potential for 
loose sands, sensitive clays and metastable soils.  Brittle clays exhibit relatively high strength at 
small strains, but significant reduction in strength at larger strains (strain-softening).  This 
behavior should be identified and quantified through the field and laboratory testing program and 
compared to the anticipated stress changes resulting from the shallow foundation and ground 
slope configuration under consideration. 
Although local or punching shear failure modes can develop in loose sands or when very narrow 
footings are used, this local condition seldom applies to bridge foundations because spread 
footings are not used on obviously weak soils and relatively large footing sizes are needed for 
structural stability (Cheney & Chassie, 2000). 
The geotechnical engineer may encounter the following two situations where application of the 
one-third reduction according to Equation 5-13 can result in an unnecessarily over-conservative 
design. 
The first is when considering a footing bearing on cohesionless soils that fall in the local shear 
portion of Figure 5-8.  Note that a one-third reduction in the tangent of a friction angle of 38 
degrees (a common value for good-quality, compacted, granular fill) results in a 73 percent 
reduction in bearing capacity factor Nq, and an 81 percent reduction in Nγ!  Also note that Figure 
5-8 does not consider the effect of large footing widths, such as used for support of bridges.  
Therefore, provided that settlement potential is checked independently (Section 5.3.4) and 
found to be acceptable, spread footings on normally consolidated cohesionless soils falling 
within the local shear portion Figure 5-8 should not be designed using the one-third 
reduction according to Equation 5-13.  
The second situation is when considering a spread footing bearing on a compacted structural fill.  
Note that Figure 5-8 is for normally consolidated, natural soil deposits.  The relative density of 
compacted structural fills as compared to compactive effort (percent relative compaction) 
indicates that for fills compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of maximum density (as 
determined by AASHTO T-180) the relative density should be at or above 75 percent (Lee & 
Singh, 1971).  This is consistent with the excellent performance history of spread footings in 
structural fills (DiMillio, 1982).  The use of the one-third reduction therefore should not be 
used in the design of footings on compacted structural fills constructed with good quality, 
granular material.  Appendix A includes materials specifications used by State highway 
agencies that routinely construct bridge abutments and pier footings supported within compacted 
structural fills. 
61 

5.2.3.7 Inclined Loading 
The inclined load case is the resultant formed by both axial and shear load components applied to 
the footing by the column or wall stem.  If the components of this resultant (i.e., axial and shear 
forces) are checked against the available resistance in the respective direction (i.e., bearing 
capacity and sliding, respectively), the inclusion of the inclined loading factor in the bearing 
capacity equation can generally be omitted.  The bearing capacity should, however, be evaluated 
using effective footing dimensions, as discussed in Section 6.4.1 and in the footnote to Table 5-2, 
since large moments can frequently be transmitted to bridge foundations by the columns or pier 
walls.  The simultaneous application of shape and load inclination factors can result in an 
overly conservative design.  Henceforth, the inclination factor will be omitted in calculation of 
bearing capacity.  A check for sliding stability should be made for all footings with inclined 
loads. 
Unusual column geometry or loading configurations should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis 
relative to the foregoing recommendation to omit the load inclination factors.  An example might 
be a strut column that is not aligned normal to the footing bearing surface.  In this case, it may be 
prudent to consider an inclined footing base for improved bearing efficiency.  Keep in mind that 
bearing surfaces that are not level may be difficult to both construct and inspect. 
5.2.3.8 Soil Compressibility 
Vesic (1975) included correction factors for soil compressibility for footings on sands and 
gravels, cq and cγ.  These factors were developed to effectively limit the allowable bearing 
capacity accounting for compression settlement of granular materials.  The factors are a function 
of soil density and applied load, and the factors do not account for soil layering or the reduction 
in stress with depth below a footing (see Section 5.3).  The procedures recommended in this 
chapter directly compute the estimated compression settlement of footings on sands and granular 
materials.  Therefore, the soil compressibility factors should not be used in calculation of 
ultimate bearing capacity of footings on granular soils when a separate settlement 
calculation is performed. 
5.2.4 Additional Considerations Regarding Bearing Capacity Correction Factors 
The inherent or implied factor of safety of a settlement-limited allowable bearing capacity 
relative to the computed ultimate bearing capacity is usually large enough to render the 
magnitude of the application of the individual correction factors small.  Consider the following 
observations: 
• AASHTO (1996) guidelines recommend calculating the shape, s, factor using the 
effective footing dimensions, B′f and L′f.  However, the original references (e.g., Vesic, 
1975) do not specifically recommend using the effective dimensions to calculate the 
shape factor.  Since the geotechnical engineer typically does not have knowledge of the 
loads causing eccentricity, it is recommended that the full footing dimensions be used to 
calculate the shape factor (Table 5-2) for use in computation of ultimate bearing capacity. 
• Bowles (1982) also recommends that the shape and load inclination factors (s and i) 
should not be combined. 
62 

• In certain loading configurations, the simultaneous application of the shape factor 
correction, the load inclination factor correction, local shear potential, the soil 
compressibility factors and a suitable factor of safety can result in a computed allowable 
bearing capacity that is only 5 percent or less of the uncorrected ultimate bearing 
capacity.  This emphasizes the over-conservatism resulting from the simultaneous 
application of all the factors that have been proposed by various researchers. 
The form of the bearing capacity equation in Equation 5-14 is therefore recommended for 
routine design applications. 
Further, the bearing capacity correction factors were developed assuming that each correction for 
each of the terms involving Nc, Nγ and Nq can be found independently.  The bearing capacity 
theory is an idealization of the response of a foundation that attempts to account for the soil 
properties and boundary conditions.  Bearing capacity analysis of foundations is frequently 
limited by the geotechnical engineer’s ability to accurately determine material properties as 
opposed to inadequacies in the theory used to develop the bearing capacity equations.  Consider 
Table 5-1 and note that a one degree change in friction angle can result in a 10 to 15 percent 
change in the factors Nc, Nγ and Nq.  Also note that the value of Nγ more than doubles when the 
friction angle increases from 35o to 40o.  Clearly, the uncertainties in the material properties will 
control the uncertainty of a bearing capacity computation to a large extent.  The importance of 
application of the correction factors is therefore secondary to adequate assessment through 
field exploration and laboratory testing of the inherent strength characteristics of the 
foundation soils. 
It should also be noted that very few spread footings of the size used for bridge support have 
been load tested to failure.  The evaluation of bearing capacity is based primarily on theory and 
laboratory testing of small-scale footings, with modification of the theoretical based on 
observation.   
5.2.5 Bearing Capacity Calculation 
The general form of the resulting ultimate bearing capacity equation, including correction terms, 
is thus: 
γγγγγ++= bsCNB5.0dbsCqN bscNq WfqqqqWqcccult  (5-14) 
where: sc, sγ and sq are shape correction factors 
bc, bγ and bq are correction factors for the inclination of the base 
dq is a correction factor to account for the shearing resistance along the failure surface 
passing through cohesionless material above the bearing elevation (recall that the 
embedment is modeled as a surcharge pressure only, applied at the bearing elevation) 
CWγ and CWq are correction factors considering the location of the ground water table 
Nc, Nγ and Nq are obtained from Table 5-1 or Figure 5-6 
Nc and Nγ are replaced with Ncq and Nγq for the sloping ground or footing near slope case 
63 

The friction angle of the soil is needed to obtain Nc, Nq and Nγ from either Table 5-1 or Figure 5-
6.  Figures 4-1 and 4-2 can be used to correlate friction angles from SPT data in cohesionless 
soil, or measured directly by laboratory tests or in situ testing. 
5.2.6 Bearing Capacity Factors of Safety 
The minimum factor of safety applied to the calculated ultimate bearing capacity will be a 
function of: 
• The confidence in the design soil strength parameters (c and φ), 
• The importance of the structure, and 
• The consequence of failure. 
Typical minimum factors of safety for shallow foundations are in the range of 2.5 to 3.5.  For 
most bridge foundation applications, a minimum factor of safety against bearing capacity failure 
of 3.0 is recommended (Cheney & Chassie, 2000). 
This factor of safety was selected through a combination of applied theory, experience and 
consensus for comparison to unfactored load combinations [allowable stress, or Service Load 
Design (SLD)].  As such, the uncertainty in both the magnitude of the loads and the available 
soil bearing strength were combined into this single factor of safety.  The general factor of safety 
equation in allowable stress, or SLD, is as follows: 
FS
RQ ni ≤∑  (5-15) 
where: Qi = applied stress (by the spread footing) 
Rn = yield stress of the member (or ultimate bearing capacity of the soil) 
FS = the applied factor of safety 
Load Factor Design (LFD) was first recommended by AASHTO in the late 1970s.  At that time, 
uncertainty in the loads was captured in the load factors.  However, it was not until the 
implementation of the AASHTO Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) Bridge Design 
Specifications (AASHTO, 1994) that an attempt was made to incorporate the uncertainty of the 
foundation soil resistances in performance, or resistance (φ), factors. 
A performance or resistance factor is not strictly the reciprocal of the factor of safety.  It is more 
properly a partial factor of safety that incorporates the potential for variation in the computed 
capacity or resistance.  It must be emphasized that performance (resistance) factors for 
geotechnical design of shallow foundations were developed using a combination of 
reliability-based calibrations, calibration with SLD (fitting) and engineering judgment.  
The performance (LFD – AASHTO, 1996) and resistance (LRFD – AASHTO, 1998) factors 
were therefore selected to match existing practice and to mimic the factors of safety used in 
allowable stress design.  The general LFD equation is: 
nii RQ ϕ≤βγ∑  (5-16) 
64 

where: γ = load factor for load combination, 
βi = load factor for particular load, Qi 
Qi = particular service load or stress 
φ = resistance factor 
Rn = nominal strength of member (e.g., yield strength for steel) 
In the years between adoption of LFD for calculating factored loads and the development of 
resistance factors for soils, agencies that elected to implement LFD found it necessary to make 
interim provisions to increase the allowable bearing capacities for spread footings provided by 
the geotechnical engineers.  If this was not done, they found that their LFD designs were 
noticeably more conservative than they had been using SLD (allowable stress) design. 
One approach used to reduce this added conservatism was to multiply the allowable bearing 
capacities by some factor, say 1.5 to 2.  Although this procedure may result in foundation 
designs that are generally similar to those developed using allowable stress methods, the 
approach should generally be avoided, because the settlement computations used to develop the 
allowable bearing capacity were based on unfactored loads, not factored (increased) loads. 
It was not until the adoption of the Load and Resistance Factor Design method (AASHTO, 1994) 
that these inconsistencies were at least partially resolved.  Appendix C contains two of the 
example problems presented in Appendix B that are solved using the LRFD method.  Notice that 
the designs are not radically different.  This is to be expected, since the LRFD resistance factors 
in AASHTO were selected such that designs would be similar to past practice. 
Clearly, the structural designer and the geotechnical engineer must be consistent in 
communication of their design criteria and methodologies.  A mixed approach of SLD for 
foundation capacities and LFD or LRFD for load calculation can result in very conservative 
designs.  The importance of good communication between the structural and geotechnical 
engineers has never been more important.  Miscommunication about the SLD factors of 
safety used to develop allowable bearing capacities can result in overconservative designs 
when LFD or LRFD load factors are used to increase the design loads that are then used to 
size a foundation.  This is especially true for AASHTO SLD Load Groups VII through XI 
(AASHTO, 1996, see Section 6.3 for a discussion of load groups and their definitions), which 
are the rare, or extreme event, loading conditions resulting from earthquake, ice loading and ice 
plus wind, respectively.  If the allowable bearing capacity provided by the geotechnical engineer 
is used to size a shallow foundation when one of these load conditions controls, the designer will 
frequently conclude that a shallow foundation must be enormous and therefore impractical.  
Expensive deep foundations such as piles or shafts are often unnecessarily selected when this 
miscommunication occurs. 
5.2.7 Presumptive Bearing Capacities 
5.2.7.1 Soil 
The use of presumptive bearing capacities for footings bearing in soils is not recommended 
for final design of shallow foundations for transportation structures, especially bridges.  
Guesses about the geology and nature of a site and application of a presumptive value from 
generalizations in the literature are not a substitute for an adequate site-specific subsurface 
65 

exploration and laboratory testing program.  An exception is preliminary evaluation of shallow 
foundation feasibility and estimation of footing dimensions for preliminary constructability or 
cost evaluation. 
Local sources of suggested presumptive values, available in engineering geology or geotechnical 
literature, are generally more realistic than capacities generalized to soil classification or found in 
design codes such as AASHTO (1996, 1998) or the NAVFAC manuals (NAVFAC, 1986a and 
1986b). 
5.2.7.2 Rock 
For conditions of intact sound rock that is stronger and less compressible than concrete, footings 
on rock with small applied loads are generally stable and thus do not require extensive study of 
the strength and compressibility characteristics of rock behavior.  However, site investigation is 
still required to confirm the consistency and extent of rock formations beneath a shallow 
foundation.   
Allowable bearing capacities for footings on relatively uniform and sound rock surfaces are 
documented in applicable building codes and engineering manuals.  Many different definitions 
for sound rock are available.  In simple terms, however, “sound rock” can generally be defined 
as rock mass that does not disintegrate after exposure to air or water, and with discontinuities 
that are unweathered, closed or tight (less than about 3 mm wide) and spaced no closer than 1 m 
apart.  Table 5-6 presents allowable bearing pressures recommended in selected local building 
codes (Goodman, 1989).  These values were developed based on experience in sound rock 
formations, with an intention of satisfying both bearing capacity and settlement criteria in order 
to provide a satisfactory factor of safety.  In most cases, it is prudent to follow the codes since 
these code-recommended values tend to be more conservative based on local experience.  
However, for supporting heavy structures, use of presumptive values may lead to overly 
conservative and costly foundations.  In such cases, most codes do allow for variance if the 
request is supported by an engineering report.   
In areas where building codes are not available or applicable, other recommended presumptive 
bearing values, such as those listed in Table 5-7, may be used to determine the allowable bearing 
pressure for sound rock.  For footings designed using these published values, the elastic 
settlements are generally less than 13 mm. Where rock is reasonably sound, but fractured, the 
presumptive values listed in Tables 5-6 and 5-7 should be reduced to prevent potential excessive 
settlement.  Most building codes also provide reduced recommended bearing pressures to 
account for the degree of fracturing.  For example, Table 5-8 presents the allowable rock bearing 
pressures in accordance with the New York City Building Code (2001). 
66 

TABLE 5-6: ALLOWABLE BEARING PRESSURES FOR FRESH ROCK OF  
VARIOUS TYPES1,2,3,4 (GOODMAN, 1989) 
Rock Type Age Location 
Allowable Bearing 
Pressure (MPa) 
Massively bedded limestone5  U.K.6 3.8 
Dolomite L. Paleoz. Chicago 4.8 
Dolomite L. Paleoz. Detroit 1.0 – 9.6 
Limestone U. Paleoz. Kansas City 0.5 – 5.8 
Limestone U. Paleoz. St. Louis 2.4 – 4.8 
Mica schist Pre-Camb. Washington 0.5 – 1.9 
Mica schist Pre-Camb. Philadelphia 2.9 – 3.8 
Manhattan schist Pre-Camb. New York 5.8 
Fordham gneisse Pre-Camb. New York 5.8 
Schist and slate - U.K.6 0.5 – 1.2 
Argillite Pre-Camb. Cambridge, 
MA 
0.5 – 1.2 
Newark shale Triassic Philadelphia 0.5 – 1.2 
Hard, cemented shale - U.K.6 1.9 
Eagleford shale Cretaceous Dallas 0.6 – 1.9 
Clay shale - U.K.6 1.0 
Pierre shale Cretaceous Denver 1.0 – 2.9 
Fox Hills sandstone Tertiary Denver 1.0 – 2.9 
Solid chalk Cretaceous U.K.6 0.6 
Austin chalk Cretaceous Dallas 1.4 – 4.8 
Friable sandstone and 
claystone 
Tertiary Oakland 0.4 – 1.0 
Friable sandstone 
(Pico formation) 
Quaternary Los Angeles 0.5 – 1.0 
Notes: 
1  According to typical building codes; reduce values accordingly to account for weathering or 
unrepresentative fracturing 
2  Values from Thornburn (1966) and Woodward, Gardner and Greer (1972). 
3  When a range is given, it relates to usual range in rock conditions. 
4  Sound rock that rings when struck and does not disintegrate.  Cracks are unweathered and open 
less than 10 mm. 
5  Thickness of beds greater than 1 m, joint spacing greater than 2 mm; unconfined compressive 
strength greater than 7.7 MPa (for a 100-mm cube). 
6  Institution of Civil Engineers Code of Practice 4. 
67 

TABLE 5-7: PRESUMPTIVE VALUES OF ALLOWABLE BEARING PRESSURES  
FOR SPREAD FOUNDATIONS ON ROCK (MODIFIED AFTER NAVFAC, 1986b) 
Allowable Bearing Pressure 
(MPa) 
Type of Bearing Material 
Consistency In 
Place Range 
Recommended
Value for Use 
Massive crystalline igneous and 
metamorphic rock: granite, diorite, basalt, 
gneiss, thoroughly cemented 
conglomerate (sound condition allows 
minor cracks) 
Hard, sound 
rock 
5.8 to 9.6 7.7 
Foliated metamorphic rock: Slate, schist 
(sound condition allows minor cracks) 
Medium-hard, 
sound rock 
2.9 to 3.8 3.4 
Sedimentary rock; hard cemented shales, 
siltstone, sandstone, limestone without 
cavities 
Medium-hard, 
sound rock 
1.4 to 2.4 1.9 
Weathered or broken bedrock of any kind 
except highly argillaceous rock (shale).  
RQD less than 25 
Soft rock 0.8 to 1.2 1 
Compaction shale or other highly 
argillaceous rock in sound condition 
Soft rock 0.8 to 1.2 1 
Notes: 
1. For preliminary analysis or in the absence of strength tests, design and proportion shallow foundations to 
distribute their loads using presumptive values of allowable bearing pressure given in this table.  Modify the 
nominal value of allowable bearing pressure for special conditions described in notes 2 through 8. 
2. The maximum bearing pressure beneath the footing produced by eccentric loads that include dead plus 
normal live load plus permanent lateral loads shall not exceed the above nominal bearing pressure. 
3. Bearing pressures up to one-third in excess of the nominal bearing values are permitted for transient live 
load from wind or earthquake.  If overload from wind or earthquake exceeds one-third of nominal bearing 
pressures, increase allowable bearing pressures by one-third of nominal value. 
4. Extend footings on soft rock to a minimum depth of 40 mm below adjacent ground surface or surface of 
adjacent floor, whichever elevation is the lowest. 
5. For footings on soft rock, increase allowable bearing pressures by 5 percent of the nominal values for each 
0.3 m of depth below the minimum depth specified in note 4. 
6. Apply the nominal bearing pressures of the three categories of hard or medium hard rock shown above 
where the base of the foundation lies on rock surface.  Where the foundation extends below the rock 
surface, increase the allowable bearing pressure by 10 percent of the nominal values for each additional 0.3 
m of depth extending below the surface. 
7. For footings smaller than 1 m in the least lateral dimension, the allowable bearing pressure shall be the 
nominal bearing pressure multiplied by the least lateral dimension (in meters). 
8. If the above-recommended nominal bearing pressure exceeds the unconfined compressive strength of intact 
specimen, the allowable pressure equals the unconfined compressive strength. 
68 

TABLE 5-8: ALLOWABLE BEARING PRESSURES FOR SPREAD  
FOUNDATIONS ON ROCK IN NEW YORK CITY 
(NEW YORK CITY BUILDING CODE, 2001) 
Description Classifications q allowable (MPa)
Hard sound 
rock 
Crystalline rocks such as Fordham Gneiss, Ravenswood Gneiss, 
Palisades Diabase and Manhattan Schist.  Characteristics: the 
rock rings when struck with pick or bar; does not disintegrate 
after exposure to air or water; breaks with sharp fresh fracture; 
cracks are unweathered and less than 3 mm (1/8 in) wide, 
generally no closer than 0.9 m (3 ft) apart; core recovery with a 
double tube, diamond core barrel is generally 85 percent or 
greater for each 1.5-m (5-ft) run 
5.8 
Medium 
sound rock 
Includes the above crystalline rocks, plus Inwood marble and 
serpentine.  Characteristics include above hard rock 
characteristics, except that cracks may be 6 mm (¼ inch) wide 
and slightly weathered, generally spaced no closer than 0.6 m (2 
ft) apart; core recovery with a double tube, diamond core barrel 
is generally 50 percent or greater for each 1.5-m (5-ft) run 
3.8 
Intermediate 
sound rock 
Includes the all of the above rock types plus cemented shale and 
sandstone of the Newark formation.  Characteristics: the rock 
gives dull sound when struck with pick or bar; does not 
disintegrate after exposure to air or water; broken pieces may 
show weathered surfaces; may contain fracture and weathered 
zones up to 25-mm (1-in) wide spaced as close as 0.3 m (1 ft); 
core recovery with a double tube, diamond core barrel is 
generally 35 percent or greater for each 1.5-m (5-ft) run 
1.9 
Soft rock Includes all of the above rocks in partially weathered condition, 
plus cemented shale and sandstones.  Characteristics: rock may 
soften on exposure to air or water; may contain thoroughly 
weathered zones up to 75 mm (3 in) wide but filled with stiff 
soil; core recovery with a double tube, diamond core barrel is 
less than 35 percent for each 1.5-m (5-ft) run, but standard 
penetration resistance in soil sampling is more than 50 blows 
per 0.3 m (1 ft) 
0.8 
 
Peck et al. (1974) presented an empirical correlation of presumptive allowable bearing pressure 
with Rock Quality Designation (RQD), as shown in Table 5-9.  AASHTO recommends using 
presumptive values proposed by Peck et al. for selecting the allowable bearing pressures; but if 
the recommended value of allowable bearing pressure exceeds the unconfined compressive 
strength of the rock or allowable stress of concrete the allowable bearing pressure should be 
taken as the lower of the two values.  Although the suggested bearing values of Peck et al. (1974) 
are substantially greater than most of the other published values and ignore the effects of rock 
types and conditions of discontinuities, they provide a useful guide for an upper-bound 
69 

estimation as well as an empirical relationship between allowable bearing values and intensity of 
fracturing and jointing (Table 5-9).  Note that with a slight increase of the degree of fracturing of 
the rock mass, when the RQD value drops from, say, 100 percent to 90 percent, the 
recommended bearing capacity value is reduced drastically from 29 to 19 MPa. 
Rock Quality Designation (RQD) is defined as the total sum of pieces of rock core greater than 
100 mm (4 in) in length.  [Example: Rock core run sample is 1.5 m (60 inches).  Summation of 
pieces of rock core greater than 100 mm (4 in) is 0.5 m (18 in).  Therefore, the RQD = 0.5/1.5 = 
0.33 or 33 percent.] 
In no instance should the allowable bearing capacity exceed the allowable stress of the concrete.  
Furthermore, Peck et al. (1974) also suggested that the average RQD for the bearing rock within 
a depth of footing width (Bf) below the base of the footing should be used if the RQD values 
within the depth are relatively uniform.  If rock within a depth of 0.5Bf is of poorer quality, the 
RQD of the poorer quality rock should be used to determine the allowable bearing capacity.   
TABLE 5-9: SUGGESTED VALUES OF ALLOWABLE BEARING  
CAPACITY (PECK ET AL., 1974) 
RQD (%) Rock Mass Quality 
Allowable Pressure 
(MPa) 
100 Excellent 29 
90 Good 19 
75 Fair 12 
50 Poor 6 
25 Very Poor 3 
0 Soil-like 1 
Note: Rock Quality Designation (RQD) is defined as the total sum of 
pieces of rock core greater than 100 mm (4 in) in length.  See example 
calculation in text. 
5.2.8 Allowable Bearing Capacities on Soil 
An acceptable and safe design can be achieved by first calculating the ultimate bearing capacity 
of a spread footing using the procedure in Section 5.2.5 and applying an adequate factor of safety 
(Section 5.2.6), then performing a settlement analysis to ensure that the foundation will function 
within performance limits under the applied stress (Sections 5.3.3, 5.3.4 and 5.3.5).  If the 
settlement at the allowable bearing stress is excessive, the allowable bearing capacity must be 
reduced until the calculated settlement is within tolerable limits.  Note that the soils within a 
zone about 1.5 times the footing width below the footing are the most significant when 
considering shear failure and settlement.  It is therefore beneficial to obtain good data about the 
subsurface soils in this zone.  SPT tests and soil sampling on 0.75-m (2.5-ft) spacing should be 
considered the minimum level of subsurface data obtained through this zone.  Sampling intervals 
can be reduced to the usual 1.5 m (5-foot) spacing below this level.  Borings still must be 
70 

extended at least through the zone of influence for settlement considerations (two to four times 
the estimated least footing width), as described in Section 4.3.2. 
Remember that allowable bearing capacity also includes consideration for limiting the potential 
for the footing to settle.  The design of shallow foundations for bridges is frequently governed by 
settlement rather than shear failure considerations, due to the large footing widths.  However, an 
adequate margin of safety should be maintained for all expected loading conditions relative to 
the potential for shear failure to develop below the footing. 
5.2.9 Allowable Bearing Capacities on IGMs and Rock 
The geotechnical engineer should use site investigation, in situ testing and lab testing to confirm 
material properties of IGMs and rock.  Judgment must then be applied to the theoretically 
computed bearing capacities combined with local experience (presumptive bearing values) when 
selecting an allowable bearing capacity for design.  To preserve stability, the geotechnical 
engineer must evaluate the potential for global stability or rock mass discontinuities to limit the 
allowable bearing capacity.  Recall that the bearing capacity of some sedimentary rock can 
dramatically decrease when exposed to weathering and moisture. 
5.2.10 Allowable Bearing Capacities on Compacted Structural Fills 
Allowable bearing capacities for spread footings constructed on compacted structural fills will be 
a function of the quality of the fill (e.g., gradation, durability, drainage), the degree of 
compaction achieved in the field, and the strength and compressibility of the embankment 
foundation materials.  For fill materials such as sands, the design allowable bearing capacity can 
be determined rationally through laboratory testing such as the direct shear test, conducted at the 
proper level of compaction and applied stress.  The friction angle yielded from such a testing 
program can be used to directly calculate an allowable bearing capacity. 
It is typically desirable and recommended that the compacted structural fills supporting spread 
footings be a select and specified material that includes sand- and gravel-sized particles.  Direct 
shear testing of such materials requires large test equipment and is therefore not practical on a 
project-by-project basis.  The design of spread footings on compacted sand and gravel materials 
is therefore a combination of experience and infrequent lab testing on specified gradations of 
select fill materials.  Materials specifications are then developed based on the specified 
gradations that ensure good quality control during construction.  This procedure helps ensure that 
the conclusions from the lab tests are valid for the construction practices used to place the fills. 
Table 5-10 lists the presumptive allowable bearing capacities used by some state highway 
agencies for design of spread footings supported on compacted structural fills.  The material and 
construction specifications associated with these bearing capacities are included in Appendix A. 
71 

TABLE 5-10: PRESUMPTIVE BEARING CAPACITY VALUES FOR FOOTINGS 
CONSTRUCTED ON COMPACTED STRUCTURAL FILLS 
Agency 
Allowable Bearing 
Capacity 
Associated Anticipated 
Settlement 
Fill Material 
Specified1,2 
Washington State 
DOT 
290 kPa (3 tsf) < 40 mm (1½ in) Gravel Borrow 
Nevada DOT 190 kPa (2 tsf) < 32 mm (1¼ in) Type 1A Aggregate 
Base 
Michigan DOT 170 kPa (1¾ tsf) Not available Granular Material 
Class III 
1 Specifications included in Appendix A. 
2 Specifications must state levels of control quality for fill material (e.g., gradation, durability), lift thickness and 
compactive effort. 
5.2.11 Overstress Allowances for Bearing Stresses 
Under Service Load Design (AASHTO, 1996), certain load groups (e.g., seismic) are permitted 
to exceed the allowable bearing stress of a member (in this case the foundation bearing material) 
by a specified percentage that ranges from 25 to 50 percent.  These overstress allowances are 
permitted for short-duration, infrequently occurring loads and may also be applied to calculated 
allowable bearing capacities. 
5.3 SETTLEMENT ESTIMATION 
The two primary considerations that affect the selection and design of shallow foundations are 
bearing capacity (discussed in the previous section) and the settlement potential of ground within 
the zone of influence below the foundation.  This section discusses the parameters and methods 
of analysis used to estimate the magnitude and time-rate of settlement for shallow foundations.   
Total settlement of a shallow foundation will result from one, or more likely, a combination of 
the following: 
a) Immediate Compression:  This settlement may result from elastic compression of the 
material supporting the foundation, or from reduction in the pore space in nonsaturated 
soils due to expulsion of air from the void space.  In cohesionless soils, nearly all the 
settlement that results from an increase in stress is associated with immediate, or elastic, 
compression. 
b) Primary Consolidation:  Consolidation settlement occurs when saturated, fine-grained 
soils experience an increase in stress.  The water in the pore spaces initially carries the 
load.  Then, as the water is expelled from the pore space, the soil experiences a reduction 
in volume and a decrease in the pore space between soil particles.  The process can be 
slow to rapid and is strongly a function of the permeability of the soil in the direction of 
drainage.  The process slows and eventually stops once all the excess pore water pressure 
72 

induced by the stress increase is dissipated.  Primary consolidation is principally a 
concern for fine-grained, or cohesive soils, since coarser grained soils are typically 
permeable enough that any volume change that occurs as a result of expulsion of water 
from void space occurs as rapidly as the loads are applied. 
c) Secondary Compression:  Some soils, after first experiencing primary consolidation 
settlement, continue to strain after excess pore-water pressures are dissipated.  This 
process is termed secondary compression, or “creep.”  Organic soils and some inorganic 
silts are soil types that can exhibit both primary consolidation and secondary 
compression, or creep, settlement. 
Initial compression accounts for the major portion of consolidation in granular soils.  Primary 
compression accounts for the major portion of consolidation in cohesive soils.  Primary and 
secondary compression both contribute significantly to consolidation settlement in organic soils. 
Differential settlement occurs when one load-bearing member of a structure experiences total 
settlement of a different magnitude than an adjacent load-bearing member.  Because differential 
settlement will introduce load and stress in the structure above the foundations, limiting 
differential settlement may frequently be of more interest in the design of a structure than total 
settlement.  If total settlements are limited, of course, differential settlements will be limited to 
an even greater extent.   
Transportation structures, especially bridges, are not exceptionally tolerant of differential 
settlement.  Deformation limitations will therefore frequently form the upper bound of allowable 
soil bearing capacities used to design shallow foundations. 
5.3.1 Serviceability Criteria 
The tolerable movements a structure can withstand depend on the type of structure, the expected 
service life and the consequences of excessive movements.  Tolerable movements are frequently 
described in terms of angular distortion between members.  “Angular distortion” is defined as the 
ratio of the differential settlement (δ') between footings to the span length (l), or δ'/l.  The 
maximum angular distortion should be limited to some acceptable value to minimize structural 
strength and serviceability problems.  Excessive differential displacements can induce significant 
structural cracking. 
Empirical studies of the performance of bridges subjected to various maximum angular 
distortions between adjacent foundations concluded that the serviceability criteria would be met 
if the angular distortion for simple span bridges is less than 0.005 and, for continuous span 
bridges, less than 0.004 (Moulton et al., 1982, 1985).  Using these criteria, a continuous span 
bridge having a span length of 30 m (100 ft) can tolerate a differential settlement of about 130 
mm (5 in) between supports.  In practice, bridges are typically designed for tolerable settlements 
much smaller than this.  It is not uncommon for continuous span structures to be designed for 
differential settlements between adjacent piers of about 25 mm (1 in) or less, and for simply 
supported spans of about 38 to 50 mm (1½ to 2 in). 
DiMillio (1982) reports in the FHWA research report “Performance of Highway Abutments on 
Spread Footings” that moderate differential movements of 25 to 75 mm (1 to 3 in) caused very 
73 

little distress in any of the structures studied.  Of the 148 bridges with spread footings studied, 
the foundation movements observed were small, and the movements did not cause significant 
distress. 
For large footings on non-uniform soil profiles, or footings subjected to large eccentric loads, 
footing rotation may be a concern.  In these cases the magnitude of the rotation can be computed 
by considering the potential differential settlement due to the difference in the applied loads or 
the non-uniformity of the soil profile. 
It should be noted that tolerable differential movement between adjacent columns within a single 
pier or bent may be significantly smaller than between adjacent piers on the same structure due 
to the rigidity and relatively short length of the superstructure cross beam.  The geotechnical and 
structural engineers should confer when there is potential for adjacent individual spread footings 
supporting columns within the same pier to experience differential settlements. 
In some situations, the total movements may be the criteria that are critical in ensuring that 
serviceability issues are met.  An example might be a simply supported, single-span structure 
with predicted settlements of several tenths of a meter at both abutments.  While the structure 
itself is not at structural or performance risk due to the total, but relatively uniform movements, 
the resulting sag in the roadway profile may be unacceptable for vehicle ride, safety or aesthetic 
issues. 
5.3.2 Vertical Stress Distribution 
This section discusses methods to determine changes in total vertical stress (∆σv) due to 
foundation loading from a spread footing.  The following methods for calculating total vertical 
stress change assume uniformly loaded foundations.  Other references (Poulos & Davis, 1974) 
may be consulted for other load distributions. 
Methods based on the theory of elasticity are the easiest and most commonly used methods to 
determine the changes in total stress due to applied foundation pressures.  Most closed-form 
solutions based on the theory of elasticity involve the assumptions that the soil is homogeneous, 
isotropic and elastic.  Lambe and Whitman (1969) report that the stresses predicted under these 
assumptions agree remarkably well with the relatively few comparisons that have been made to 
actual measured stresses, but the authors go on to point out that the computed stresses may be in 
error by as much as 25 percent or more.  The charts in Figures 5-9 to 5-11 can be used to 
estimate the stress increases beneath circular, strip and rectangular loaded areas.  The loadings 
are assumed to be uniform, an assumption that has been found to yield reasonable results for 
settlement prediction purposes. 
Note that the principle of superposition may be used with Figure 5-11 to evaluate stresses 
resulting from irregular or multiple loaded areas.  The FHWA EMBANK program (Urzua, 1993) 
uses these procedures to compute stress increases beneath embankments, which can be used for 
settlement analysis of approach embankments. 
 
 
74 

 
 
 
Note: In the above Figures,  and vσ∆ hσ∆  are analogous to, may be substituted for, ∆ and , 
respectively. 
1σ 3σ∆
Figure 5-9: Stresses Under Uniform Load on Circular Area (Lambe & Whitman, 1969) 
 
75 

 
 
 
 
Figure 5-10: Stresses Under Uniform Strip Load (Lambe & Whitman, 1969) 
 
76 

 
Figure 5-11:  (a) Chart for Use in Determining Vertical Stresses Below Corners of  
Loaded Rectangular Surface Areas on Elastic, Isotropic Material 
(b) At Point A, ∆σv = ∆qs × f (m,n) (From Newmark, 1942) 
77 

Alternatively, stress distributions can also be obtained by assuming a 2-to-1 distribution of stress 
below the footing, as shown in Figure 5-12.  This is much simpler to compute and is a reasonably 
accurate approximation of the decrease in stress with depth due to an applied surficial load of 
limited areal extent.   
A comparison of the simplified 2-to-1 distribution with the actual distributed stress according to 
elastic theory is shown in Figure 5-13.  This distribution can be computed as a function of 
applied stress according to: 
q
vσ∆  = 
)ZL)(ZB(
LB
ff
ff
++
 (5-17) 
where: ∆σV = Change in vertical stress at depth Z below the footing bearing elevation 
 q = Stress applied by the footing at the bearing elevation 
 Z = Depth below footing bearing elevation to point of interest, usually the center 
or midpoint of a soil layer or sublayer where a settlement computation is to 
be made 
 B f = Width of footing 
 L f = Length of footing 
5.3.3 Footings on Cohesive Soils 
Primary and secondary consolidation of clays or clayey deposits may result in substantial 
settlements when the structure is founded on saturated cohesive soils.  Settlement resulting from 
primary consolidation may take weeks to years to be completed.  Furthermore, because soil 
properties may vary beneath the foundation, the duration of the primary consolidation and the 
amount of settlement may also vary with the location of the footing, resulting in differential 
settlement between footing locations.  If such settlements are not within tolerable limits, the 
structure may not perform as expected or intended. 
When a foundation is wide compared to the compressible layer thickness beneath it, a large 
portion of the soil will settle vertically (one-dimensionally) with very little lateral displacement 
because of the constraining forces exerted by the neighboring soil elements.  Based on 
measurements of lateral displacements beneath embankments and tanks, it is usually reasonable 
to assume that the settlements beneath a foundation will be one-dimensional even for narrow 
foundations, provided an adequate factor of safety is applied to bearing capacity (Terzaghi & 
Peck, 1967).  Desiccated crust or overburden above the base of the footing will tend to minimize 
the amount of lateral displacements.  Experience suggests that reasonably good estimates of 
settlement can be predicted assuming one-dimensional compression as long as the factor of 
safety is at least three (3) against bearing capacity failure.  One-dimensional consolidation theory 
is presented in this section and is used to calculate settlement estimates for shallow foundations 
on cohesive soils.  
 
78 

Figure 5-12: Distribution of Vertical Stress by the 2:1 Method 
(Chen and McCarron, 1991) 
 
79 

Figure 5-13: Comparison of Vertical Stress Increase Below a Uniformly  
Loaded Square Area as Computed by Elastic Theory and  
Approximated by the 2:1 Method (Perloff, 1975) 
One-dimensional consolidation testing (ASTM D-2435) on undisturbed soil samples is 
recommended for determining the compressibility of clays.  The procedure for obtaining 
undisturbed samples and specifying the appropriate load increments for conducting the test is 
described in detail in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & 
Chassie, 2000).   
Some natural deposits of cohesive soils have undergone heavy compression in their geologic 
history due to the weight of glaciers, the weight of overlying soil that was subsequently eroded 
away or dessication (drying) of the soils.  These soils are called “preconsolidated” or 
“overconsolidated” and have been subjected to larger stresses in the past than at present.  
Preconsolidated soils can exhibit compressibility that is up to an order of magnitude less than 
normally consolidated soils.  Preconsolidated soils can therefore be reloaded to a stress level 
lower than the preconsolidation pressure without experiencing large settlements.  Identification 
of preconsolidated soils through consolidation testing can allow the cost-effective use of 
shallow foundations on such soils. 
Settlement due to consolidation can be estimated from the slope of the one-dimensional 
consolidation test void ratio (e = volume of void/volume of solids) versus the logarithm of the 
vertical effective stress (σ′v) curve.  Figure 5-14 shows a typical consolidation curve from a one-
dimensional consolidation test and the recommended procedure to obtain the preconsolidation 
pressure (σ′p) developed by Casagrande (1936).  The following definitions apply to the variables 
in the drawing. 
80 

 
 
Figure 5-14:  Void Ratio versus Log Effective Vertical Stress Curve from a Consolidation  
Test on Clay and the Casagrande Procedure for Determining the 
Preconsolidation Pressure (after Holtz & Kovacs, 1981) 
Preconsolidation pressure, σ′p – The maximum pressure to which a soil has been loaded in the 
past.  It is useful to carefully establish a maximum and minimum value of σ′p and plot the range 
as a function of depth on the effective stress versus depth chart for the foundation location under 
consideration. 
Compression Index, CC – The slope of virgin compression in the e-log(σ′vc) curve.  Virgin 
compression is the soil response to stresses higher than the preconsolidation pressure. 
Recompression Index, CR – The slope of the e-log(σ′vc) curve at pressures less than the 
preconsolidation pressure.  In general, the recompression index is approximately one-tenth the 
magnitude of the compression index in virgin compression. 
Initial Void Ratio, eo – The void ratio at the initial overburden stress, σ′Vo. 
The overconsolidation ratio (OCR) is used to distinguish overconsolidated soils from normally 
consolidated soils and is defined as the ratio of the preconsolidation pressure (σ′p) at depth z to 
the existing vertical normal effective pressure (σ′vo) at the same depth, z.  
OCR= σ′p/σ′vo (5-18) 
81 

Soils with an OCR=1 are normally consolidated, while those with an OCR>1 are 
preconsolidated. The magnitude of expected settlement depends on the magnitude of loading of 
the subsurface soils relative to the magnitude of σ'p.  The magnitude of σ'p is determined from the 
corrected one-dimensional consolidation test results.  
Sampling disturbance can mask whether a soil is normally consolidated or overconsolidated, 
resulting in quantitatively poor estimates of settlements.  Therefore, the highest quality samples 
should be obtained to measure the soil shear strength, compressibility and degree of 
preconsolidation in laboratory tests.  The principal error in computing settlement for 
homogeneous clays is in the estimating of the degree of overconsolidation (Peck et al., 1974).  
The designer should use all available evidence to estimate the degree of preconsolidation.  The 
undrained shear strength (cu) and plasticity index (PI) can be used as a check (Peck et al., 1974) 
to estimate if a soil deposit is overconsolidated.  The ratio of the undrained shear strength (cu) 
and the vertical effective stress for normally consolidated clays has been correlated to plasticity 
index (Skempton, 1948; Bjerrum & Simons, 1960) and can be computed according to Equation 
5-19. 
)PI(004.010.0c
v
u +=σ′  (5-19) 
If the cu/σ'v values in the field are significantly higher than Equation 5-19, the soil is probably 
overconsolidated.  Furthermore, if the deposit is known to be normally consolidated (i.e., 
OCR=1), the undrained shear strength determined from in situ or laboratory tests can be checked 
with this relationship. 
The settlement induced by a shallow foundation can be kept to a minimum if the combined effect 
of the initial effective stress and the stress increase transmitted by the footing is lower than the 
preconsolidation pressure, σ′p.  When site and economic conditions permit, the foundations may 
be designed to distribute structure loads such that they remain below preconsolidation stresses.   
Numerous correlations have been made between the compression index, Cc, and common index 
tests for normally consolidated soils and several are included in Table 5-11.  Note that the 
values of Cc can vary by as much as a factor of 5 (using the average trend line) in these 
empirical correlations for cohesive soils.  They should not be used for final design of 
footings on cohesive soils. 
The primary consolidation settlement, Sc, of a foundation resting on layers of normally 
consolidated soils (σ′p=σ′vo) can be computed from: 
vo
vf
10o
i o
c
c '
'  log H e1
C  S σ
σ∑ +=
n
 (5-20)  
82 

TABLE 5-11: CORRELATIONS FOR COMPRESSION INDEX, CC 
Correlation Soil Source 
Cc = 0.009 (LL-10) (1) Clay of medium to low 
sensitivity (St<4) (2) 
Terzaghi & Peck (1967) 
Cc = 0.0115 wn (3) Organic soils, peat ASCE (1994) 
Cc = 0.04 to 0.006 (4) Uniform silts Hough (1959) 
Cc = 0.015 to 0.02 (4) Uniform sand, loose Hough (1959) 
Cc = 0.004 to 0.008 (4) Uniform sand, dense Hough (1959) 
1 LL=liquid limit 
2 St=sensitivity=Undisturbed undrained shear strength/Remolded undrained shear strength 
3 wn= natural water content 
4 Cc = 1/C′ where C′ is the bearing capacity index (Figure 5-19).  Note: These are for cohesionless 
soils, but are included here for comparison purposes. 
where: Sc = primary consolidation due to the change in void ratio of the soil 
Cc = compression index of the normally consolidated portion of the e–log  
σ′v curve 
 e o = initial void ratio 
 H o = thickness of layer n 
 σ′vo = initial effective vertical stress at the center of layer n 
 σ′vf = final effective vertical stress at the center of layer n 
The final effective vertical stress is computed by adding the stress change due to the foundation 
load to the initial vertical effective stress.  The change in the vertical effective stress is computed 
using the methods discussed in Section 5.3.2.  The total settlement will be the sum of the 
compression in each of the n layers of soil. 
Normally, the slope, Cc, of the virgin portion of the e-log σ′v curve is determined from the 
corrected one-dimensional consolidation curve measured on specimens taken from each relevant 
soil in the stratigraphic column. 
Sometimes the consolidation data are presented in terms of vertical strain (εv) instead of void 
ratio (Figure 5-15).  In this case, the slope of the virgin portion of the εv versus log σv curve is 
denoted as Ccε, and the settlement is computed using Equation 5-21 for normally consolidated 
soils. 
)'/'(log CH  S vovf'10co
n
1c σσ∑= ε  (5-21) 
83 

 (a) (b) 
Figure 5-15: Typical Consolidation Curve for Normally Consolidated Soil 
(a) Void Ratio and (b) Vertical Strain versus Vertical Effective Stress 
If the water content of a clay layer below the water table is closer to the plastic limit than the 
liquid limit, or if the ratio of cu/σ'v exceeds the value from Equation 5-19, then the soil is likely 
overconsolidated.  As a result, the field state of stress (before footing loads are applied) will 
reside on the recompression portion of the e versus log σ'v curve.  When a footing applies a load 
to the overconsolidated layer, the state of stress will first follow the recompression portion of the 
curve, until the preconsolidation pressure is reached.  For stress states larger than the 
preconsolidation pressure, the virgin portion of the curve is followed.  The settlements for the 
case of n layers of over-consolidated soils (OCR>1) are computed from Equation 5-22 (Figure 5-
16a) or Equation 5-23 (Figure 5-16b). 
)'
' log C  '
'
 logC (e 1
H  S
p
vf10c
vo
p
10r
o
on
1
c σ
σ+σ
σ
+∑=  (5-22) 
)'
' log C  '
'
 logC ( H  S
p
vf10c
vo
p
10ro
n
1
c σ
σ+σ
σ
∑= εε        (5-23) 
The total settlement is computed by subdividing each compressible layer within the zone of 
influence, ZI, into a sufficient number of sublayers, n, such that the initial and final stress 
calculated at the center of each layer is representative of the average stress for the layer, and the 
material properties are reasonably constant within the layer.  The layers are typically 1.5 to 3 m 
thick in highway bridge applications.  In cases where the various stratigraphic layers represent 
combinations of both normally and preconsolidated soils, the settlement is computed using the 
appropriate combinations of Equations 5-20 through 5-23. 
84 

 (a) (b) 
Figure 5-16:  Typical Consolidation Curve for Overconsolidated Soil 
(a) Void Ratio and (b) Vertical Strain versus Vertical Effective Stress 
5.3.3.1 Time Rate of Consolidation 
Consolidation occurs when a saturated compressible layer of soil is loaded and water is squeezed 
out of the layer.  The time required for the (primary) consolidation process to end will depend on 
both the compressibility and the permeability of the soil.   
The rate of consolidation is usually of lesser concern for foundations because superstructure 
damage will occur once the differential settlements become excessive.  Shallow foundations are 
designed to withstand the settlement that will ultimately occur during the life of the structure, 
regardless of the time it takes for the settlement to occur.  It is generally much more important to 
predict the time rate of the settlement of an approach embankment on soft clay, particularly if the 
embankment is surcharged in order to allow use of a spread footing.  The procedure for 
computing the time-rate of settlement is beyond the scope of this document.  However, design of 
approach embankments and surcharges for dealing with settlement of approach embankments is 
included in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000).  
These procedures can be used to manage the potential for approach embankment settlement to 
allow the use of a spread footing supported in the approach fill.  Example 3 in Appendix B 
shows the elements of this procedure. 
5.3.3.2 Secondary Compression 
Soils susceptible to secondary compression (creep) are generally too poor to consider supporting 
a shallow foundation on them.  Even if the primary consolidation can be managed with 
surcharging, the uncertainty associated with predicting the magnitude of secondary compression 
settlements is generally too great to reliably found a spread footing on or over creep-susceptible 
soils. 
85 

5.3.4 Footings on Cohesionless Soils 
The design of shallow foundations on cohesionless soils (sand, gravel and non-plastic silt), either 
as found in situ or as engineered fill, is often controlled by settlement potential, rather than 
bearing capacity limitations.  The method used to estimate settlement of footings on cohesionless 
soils should therefore be reliable so that the predicted settlement is rarely less than the observed 
settlement, yet still reasonably accurate so that designs are not inefficient.  Most settlement 
estimation methods are based on either elasticity theory or semi-empirical correlation to large 
databases of soil test data. 
Settlement estimation methods based on elastic theory can be unreliable due to the difficulty of 
measuring the elastic modulus of granular soils.  Modulus estimation is difficult because true 
undisturbed sampling of cohesionless soils is neither simple nor practical for routine foundation 
design.  The modulus of granular soils can be estimated from in situ tests but, again, the 
reliability can be variable. 
Semi-empirical methods are therefore the predominant techniques used to estimate settlements of 
shallow foundations on cohesionless soils.  These methods have been correlated to large 
databases of simple and inexpensive tests such as the Standard Penetration Test (SPT) and the 
Cone Penetrometer Test (CPT).   
Two major studies (Burland & Burbidge, 1984; and Gifford et al., 1987) on shallow foundations 
in sands included 76 independent case histories that are relevant to highway bridge shallow 
foundations.  The Gifford et al. study compiled data from 21 case histories to compare the 
predictive capabilities of 11 methods of computing settlements of shallow foundations on sands. 
Gifford et al. conducted a monitoring program to evaluate the actual time-settlement behavior of 
typical spread footing foundations on cohesionless soil.  Over a period of 3 years, they monitored 
21 bridge foundations on shallow spread footings from initial construction through completion of 
the structures.  The data from this instrumentation program then were used to evaluate the 
accuracy of several settlement calculation methods.  The methods that Gifford et al. evaluated in 
their final study were Burland & Burbidge (1984), D’Appolonia et al. (1968), Hough (1959), 
Peck & Bazaraa (1969), Schmertmann (1970), and Oweis (1979).  For each of the five settlement 
prediction methods, Gifford et al. plotted measured settlement versus calculated settlement for 
each bridge foundation as shown in Figure 5-17.   
In the 1990s, FHWA funded a study to examine the load-settlement behavior of large footings on 
cohesionless soils (Briaud & Gibbens, 1994, Briaud & Gibbens, 1995, and Briaud et al., 2000).  
The study included measuring settlement as vertical loads were applied to five square test 
footings ranging in size from 1 m by 1 m to 3 m by 3 m.  The subsurface conditions at the 
National Geotechnical Experimental Site on the Riverside Campus of Texas A&M University 
were extensively evaluated using a wide range of exploration and testing procedures, including 
SPT, CPT, PMT, dilatometer tests, triaxial tests, borehole shear tests, and other measurements.  
As part of a prediction symposium, thirty-one authors submitted papers with alpha predictions of 
the load that would induce 25 mm (1 in) of settlement.  Although an effort was made to compare 
predicted versus measured settlements for the numerous settlement computation methods used 
by the authors, it was concluded that there was too much variability in the way the various 
86 

0 
1 
Calculated Settlement  
Measured Settlement  
0 1 2 
 
 + Burland & Burbidge 
 ● D’Appolonia 
 * Hough 
 o Peck & Bazaraa 
 x Schmertmann 
Figure 5-17: Calculated versus Measured Settlements (Gifford et al., 1987) 
authors applied the methods to draw valid conclusions about the reliability and accuracy of the 
various methods.  The most promising development resulting from this research is a method for 
computing settlement versus applied load using pressuremeter data.  The method is presented in 
summary form in Section 5.3.4.3.  This method is of particular interest in deformation-based 
analysis (as opposed to force-based analysis) and holds promise for evaluation of extreme load 
cases such as earthquake.  The method may also be of notable value in the implementation of 
Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD), as discussed in Appendix C. 
Considering the performance expectation of any settlement estimation method, the following 
criteria are important: 
• The method should be reliable.  That is, it should predict settlement with reasonable 
accuracy over a relatively wide range of soil conditions. 
• The method should not exhibit a large standard deviation when comparing predicted 
settlement to actual settlement.  A method that exhibits a large standard deviation in this 
regard has the potential for underpredicting settlement to a large extent, a condition that 
may result in poor structure performance. 
• The method should be easy to implement and be based on site-specific data that are 
readily available and inexpensive to obtain. 
• The method should have a substantial history of use with satisfactory results. 
Unfortunately, no method for estimating settlement on granular soils does an outstanding job of 
meeting all these criteria.  However, the studies discussed above do conclude that at least some 
of the methods meet most of these criteria reasonably well.  Using these criteria, two methods 
were selected as currently preferred and recommended procedures for estimating settlement of 
foundations on granular soils: the Hough method and the D’Appolonia method.  The load-
87 

settlement curve method recently developed by Briaud is also presented as a promising new 
method for computing deflections of spread footings on cohesionless soils (specifically sands) 
over a range of applied loads when pressuremeter test data are available. 
The data from the Gifford study indicate that the Hough method, on average, overpredicts 
settlement by a factor of about 2, and is thus less than desirable with respect to accuracy.  
However, the Hough method is relatively reliable in that it is conservative and consistent.  The 
Gifford study found that the method has a relatively low standard deviation of calculated versus 
predicted measurements (so = 0.82).  The Hough method is based on the SPT test and is easy and 
inexpensive to implement.  Most notably, it is already currently used by many highway agencies, 
so it has a vast history of satisfactory application in the design of shallow bridge foundations 
across the United States.  It also has the desirable attributes of rationally accounting for both the 
increase in stress induced below a footing and the layering of soil deposits. 
The Gifford study found the D’Appolonia method to be the most statistically accurate method 
evaluated.  The standard deviation of calculated versus predicted measurements was also the 
lowest of the methods studied (so = 0.51).  It computes settlement based on the modulus of 
compressibility of sand as correlated to the SPT test; therefore it is easy and inexpensive to 
implement.  The method has the additional advantage of explicitly accounting for the effect of 
soil preloading, although the database to which preloaded modulus values were correlated was 
limited.  Potential current drawbacks of the D’Appolonia method include the following: 
• It has limited application history for highway bridges, especially as compared to the 
Hough method. 
• It does not expressly account for soil layering. 
• The distribution of stress below the loaded area is accounted for with an empirical 
correction factor that does not suggest a limiting depth of stress influence. 
• The population of the database used to develop the method’s modulus correlation as a 
function of SPT N-values is limited. 
• Because it is statistically more “accurate,” it is also potentially unconservative in 
practical application.  That is, about half the normally distributed data will fall on the 
unconservative side of predicted versus measured settlement. 
The data from the five full-scale load tests (Briaud & Gibbens, 1995) were used by the author to 
compare the performance of both the Hough and D’Appolonia methods of predicting the load 
that would result in 25 mm (1 in) of settlement.  Note that this was not a true alpha prediction.  
Nevertheless, the field performance data from the five load tests is excellent, and the two 
methods were applied as strictly as possible according to the procedures described below.  The 
comparison yielded the following conclusions: 
• The Hough method was found to over-predict settlement by an average factor of about 
1.8 for the five footings (the standard deviation, so, was 0.53).  In no case, however, did 
the Hough method under-predict the observed settlement. 
88 

• The D’Appolonia method under-predicted the settlement by an average factor of about 
0.77 for the five footings, but the accuracy was generally better than Hough, and the 
scatter in the predicted settlement values was also less (standard deviation, so = 0.22). 
The data from the five load tests therefore generally corroborate the conclusions from the Gifford 
et al. and Burland & Burbidge studies. 
Therefore, it is currently recommended that the Hough method be used as a primary 
design and analysis tool.  The D’Appolonia or load-settlement methods could be employed as 
alternates, or when a more accurate estimate of settlement is desired, recognizing that these 
alternate methods have less history of use in the design of highway bridges.  Naturally, if another 
method is locally or regionally known to provide more reliable estimates of settlement on 
granular soils, and the method meets the criteria noted above, the geotechnical engineer should 
exercise judgment and use the best method available. 
5.3.4.1 Hough Method 
Hough (1959) developed an empirical method for predicting settlements of shallow foundations 
on cohesionless soils that follows the same approach as that used for calculating consolidation 
settlement of clay layers.  Note that the method is applicable only for normally consolidated 
cohesionless soils.  Cheney and Chassie (2000) recommend that the SPT blowcounts be 
corrected for overburden pressure before correlating the N-values to the bearing capacity index, 
C′.  An overburden correction by Bazaraa (1967) was recommended by Cheney and Chassie 
(2000).  Since that time, many researchers have studied the effect of overburden stress on the 
SPT N-value, largely in support of liquefaction hazard assessment procedures.  Recent consensus 
by the 1996 and 1998 National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER) (Youd et 
al., 2001) concluded that the correction proposed by Liao & Whitman (1986) (shown in Figure 
5-18) could be used for routine engineering applications.  Therefore, the correction by Liao & 
Whitman is included here as part of the Hough procedure, in particular because it is easy to 
calculate and can be used without charts in simple computation spreadsheets.  The soil is divided 
into layers, and the change in effective vertical stress at the mid-height of the layer as a result of 
the applied load is estimated using elastic theory. 
The total settlement by the Hough method is calculated as follows: 
1. Correct SPT blowcounts for overburden stress using Figure 5-18. 
2. Determine bearing capacity index (C′) from Figure 5-19 using corrected SPT blowcounts, 
N′, determined in Step 1. 
3. Subdivide subsurface soil profile into approximately 3-m (10-ft) layers based on 
stratigraphy to a depth of about three times the footing width. 
4. Calculate the effective vertical stress, σ′vo, at the midpoint of each layer and the average 
bearing capacity index for that layer. 
5. Calculate the increase in stress at the midpoint of each layer, ∆σv, using either Figure 5-9, 
5-10 or 5-11, or the 2:1 method (Figure 5-12). 
89 

Correction Factor for SPT (N) Blow Counts
0.1
1.0
10.0
0 100 200 300
σ'Vo (kPa)
N'/N
N'/N = 1/(σ'Vo/95.76)0.5 
σ'Vo in kPa
2.0 max.
 
Figure 5-18:  Corrected SPT (N) versus Overburden Pressure (after Liao & Whitman, 1986) 
6. Calculate the settlement in each layer, ∆H, under the applied load using the following 
formula: 






σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
vo
vvo
o
flogC
1HH  (5-24) 
7. Sum the incremental settlements to determine the total settlement. 
5.3.4.2 D’Appolonia Method 
The D’Appolonia method calculates settlement using the following basic equation: 
1ofV
M
BH µµ



 σ∆=∆  (5-25) 
where: ∆H = settlement in sand or sand and gravel 
 ∆σv = applied stress beneath footing 
 B f = footing width 
 µ O = correction factor for embedment – see Figure 5-20 (dimensionless) 
 µ 1 = correction factor for thickness of sand layer – see Figure 5-20 (dimensionless) 
 M = modulus of compressibility of sand – see Figure 5-21 
Any consistent set of units can be used for ∆H, ∆σv, Bf and M. 
90 

Figure 5-19:  Bearing Capacity Index versus Corrected SPT 
(Cheney & Chassie, 2000, modified from Hough, 1959) 
 
91 

 
Figure 5-20:  Correction Factors for Embedment and Layer Thickness  
(Christian & Carrier, 1978) 
 
 
Note: In the above Figure, “Table” refers to a tabulation of load versus settlement data from seven case 
histories, including six bridge footings, by D’Appolonia et al., (1970), and “Site” refers to the load versus 
settlement data obtained by D’Appolonia at al., (1968) at a large steel mill site in northern Indiana. 
Figure 5-21:  Modulus of Compressibility (D’Appolonia, 1968, 1970) 
92 

Further discussion of the application and use of other methods to calculate settlement can be 
found in the NHI Shallow Foundations Reference Manual (Munfakh et al., 2000).  Methods 
covered in the Reference Manual include Schmertmann (1970), Peck & Bazaraa (1969), and 
Terzaghi & Peck (1967). 
5.3.4.3 Load-Settlement Curve Method 
In recent research, Briaud and colleagues (Briaud & Gibbens, 1994, Briaud & Gibbens, 1995, 
and Briaud et al., 2000) developed a procedure to estimate settlements of spread footings on sand 
using pressuremeter test (PMT) data.  They developed the procedure because they had observed 
that the movement of the soil below a footing during large scale load tests showed an analogy to 
the movement of soil around an expanding pressuremeter probe during a pressuremeter test.  The 
procedure is as follows: 
1. Perform pre-bored pressuremeter tests within the depth of influence of the footing, 
typically at depths of 0.5B, 1B and 2B below the bearing elevation of the footing.  Refer 
to The Pressuremeter Test for Highway Applications (Briaud, 1989) or The 
Pressuremeter (Briaud, 1992) for details regarding performance of the test and reduction 
of the test data. 
2. Reduce the data and average the pressuremeter curves into a single pressuremeter curve. 
3. Transform the average pressuremeter curve point-by-point into the load-settlement curve 
for the footing using Equations 5-26 through 5-35.  Equation 5-26 aims at ensuring strain 
compatibility.  The footing limit pressure is defined as the footing pressure corresponding 
to a settlement equal to 10 percent of the footing width (ρ/B = 0.1).  Correspondingly, the 
pressuremeter limit pressure is defined as the pressure reached when the relative increase 
in cavity radius is equal to 0.42.  Equation 5-26 ensures that when ρ/B is equal to 0.1, 
∆R/R0 is equal to 0.42, and therefore the two limit pressures are corresponding. 
 




 ∆=ρ
0R
R
2.4
1
B  (5-26) 
where: ρ =  Vertical settlement of the footing 
B = Footing width 
∆R/R0 = Ratio of the increase in cavity radius to the original radius from average 
pressuremeter test 
Once Equation 5-26 is satisfied, Equation 5-27 is used to transform the pressuremeter pressure, 
pp, into the footing pressure, pf, through the gamma function, Γ. 
pf = fL/B  fe  fδ  fβ,d  Γ (pp) (5-27) 
where: pf =  Transformed footing pressure 
 pp = Pressuremeter pressure 
 Γ = Gamma function computed according to Equation 5-28 
 fL/B = Influence factor for footing shape, Equation 5-29 
 fe = Influence factor for load eccentricity, Equations 5-30 & 5-31 
93 

 fδ = Influence factor for load inclination, Equations 5-32 & 5-33 
 fβ,d = Influence factor for influence of slope, Equations 5-34 & 5-35 
The gamma function, Γ, transforms the pressuremeter pressure, pp, into the footing pressure, pf, 
for a square footing loaded vertically at its center on a flat ground surface.  This function was 
developed using data from 22 footing load tests from 9 different sand and silt sites.  The gamma 
function recommended for design was chosen as the mean function through the data points 
minus one standard deviation to be on the safe side (conservative).  The gamma function is 
computed according to Equation 5-28. 
Γ = 8.0
5.0B100
9.0 +
+



 ρ  (5-28) 
where: ρ =  Vertical settlement of the footing 
 B = Footing width 
The influence factors, f, for more complex loading conditions were developed from numerical 
simulations because there are insufficient load tests available for these load cases to correlate the 
factors directly to performance data.  The influence factors were compared with the few existing 
applicable load tests and with other existing recommendations for influence factors. 
The influence factor for footing shape can be computed using Equation 5-29. 
fL/B = 



+ L
B2.08.0  (5-29) 
where: L = Footing length 
 B = Footing width 
The influence factor for eccentric loading can be computed using Equations 5-30 and 5-31, 
depending on the settlement location of interest. 
fe = 



− B
e33.01  at the center of the footing (5-30) 
 = 
5.0
B
e 



−1  at the edge of the footing (5-31) 
where: B = Footing width 
 e = Eccentric distance due to applied moment in the direction of B 
The influence factor for inclined loading can be computed using Equations 5-32 and 5-33, 
depending on the settlement location of interest. 
fδ = 
2
901 



 δ−  at the center of the footing (5-32) 
94 

fδ = 
5.0
3601 



 δ−  at the edge of the footing (5-33) 
where: δ = Inclination of load from the vertical, in degrees. 
The influence factor for a footing located adjacent to a slope can be computer using Equations 5-
34 and 5-35, depending on the slope inclination and the proximity of the footing to the slope. 
fβ,d = 
1.0
B
d18.0 



 +  β = 18.4 degrees (3:1 slope) (5-34) 
 = 
15.0
B
d17. 



 +0  β = 26.6 degrees (2:1 slope) (5-35) 
where: β =  Slope inclination from the horizontal 
 d = Horizontal distance from top of slope to closest edge of footing 
 B = Footing width 
Based on the comparison data studied to date, the load settlement curve method shows 
significant promise for accurately predicting the settlement of a spread footing on cohesionless 
soils over a fairly large range of applied loads.  The method may therefore prove uniquely useful 
in deformation-based design.  Deformation-based design is not covered here, but holds promise 
for analysis of structures under extreme loading conditions, such as earthquake. 
Important considerations regarding use of the load-settlement curve method: 
1. The researchers that developed this method acknowledge that it is new and that use in 
parallel with existing design approaches on full scale bridge projects, with performance 
measurements, is needed before the method can be implemented as a validated, everyday 
design tool. 
2. Pressuremeter tests are still used infrequently, as compared to the SPT, hence the skills 
needed to perform and interpret the test results may be locally limited.   
3. The method develops load settlement relationships in normalized displacement (i.e., ρ/B).  
This form should be reduced to displacement versus footing width for a tolerable 
magnitude of settlement (as defined by the performance requirements of the structure) in 
order to be used in the recommended design procedures in this GEC (see Chapter 6 and 
the design examples in Appendices B and C). 
5.3.5 Footings on Structural Fills 
Calculation of settlement within the structural fill due to a spread footing supported in the fill 
requires an assumption about the compressibility of the constructed fill material.  Because 
structural fills should be constructed using good-quality granular materials, the estimation of 
settlement lends itself to application of the methods discussed in the previous section.  To do so, 
an assumption must be made about the representative SPT N-value of the compacted fill. 
95 

The Gifford et al., (1987) study used a corrected (for overburden pressure) SPT N-value of 32 
blows per foot as a representative value for estimating settlement in structural fills.  This would 
correspond to a relative density, DR, of about 85 percent at an overburden stress of about 100 kPa 
(1 tsf) (Figure 4-1).  Correlations of relative density to percent relative compaction suggest that 
this value of DR is at or above 95 percent relative compaction (Lee & Singh, 1971) and therefore 
approximates the compaction criteria for structural fill used by most highway agencies.  
Although Lee & Singh (1971) do not specifically state the relative compaction criteria (i.e., 
standard or modified Proctor), the comparisons were for granular soils and the modified Proctor 
method is mentioned.  It is therefore assumed that the comparisons were based on the modified 
Proctor test.  In the absence of other SPT data in structural fills, the settlement of a footing 
supported on structural fill can be estimated using an assumed corrected N-value (N′) of 32 
and the Hough method for computing settlement. 
5.3.6 Footings on IGMs and Rock 
As discussed in Section 3.1.3, the assumption is made in this GEC that intermediate geomaterials 
(IGMs) are stiff and strong enough that bearing capacity and settlement considerations will 
generally not govern design of a spread footing supported on such material.  If a settlement 
estimate is necessary for shallow foundations supported on IGM or rock, a method based on 
elasticity theory will generally be the best approach.  As with any of the methods for estimating 
settlement that use elasticity theory, a major limitation is the engineer’s ability to accurately 
estimate the modulus parameter(s) required by the method. 
Equation 5-36 may be used to compute settlement on rock based on Young’s modulus of the 
intact rock.  In this equation, the stress applied at the top of the rock surface can be calculated 
using the stress distribution methods shown in Figures 5-9 through 5-12. 
IRE
2
fVd
v E
)1(BC
α
ν−σ∆=δ  (5-36) 
where: δv =  Vertical settlement at surface 
 C d = Shape and rigidity factors (Table 5-12) 
 ∆σv = Change in stress at top of rock surface due to applied footing load 
 B f = Footing width or diameter 
 ν = Poisson’s ratio (Table 5-13) 
 E IR = Young’s modulus of intact rock (Table 5-14) 
 αE = Modulus reduction factor based on RQD (Equation 5-37) 
15.032.1)RQD(0231.0E ≥−=α  (5-37) 
where: RQD = Rock Quality Designation, in percent. 
96 

TABLE 5-12: SHAPE AND RIGIDITY FACTORS, Cd, FOR CALCULATING 
SETTLEMENTS OF POINTS ON LOADED AREAS AT THE SURFACE  
OF AN ELASTIC HALF SPACE WITH INFINITE DEPTH 
(AFTER WINTERKORN & FANG, 1975) 
Shape Center Corner 
Middle of 
Short Side 
Middle of 
Long Side Average 
Circle 1.00 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.85 
Circle (rigid) 0.79 0.79 0.79 0.79 0.79 
Square 1.12 0.56 0.76 0.76 0.95 
Square (rigid) 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 
Rectangle (length/width):     
1.5 1.36 0.67 0.89 0.97 1.15 
2 1.52 0.76 0.98 1.12 1.30 
3 1.78 0.88 1.11 1.35 1.52 
5 2.10 1.05 1.27 1.68 1.83 
10 2.53 1.26 1.49 2.12 2.25 
100 4.00 2.00 2.20 3.60 3.70 
1000 5.47 2.75 2.94 5.03 5.15 
10000 6.90 3.50 3.70 6.50 6.60 
 
TABLE 5-13: SUMMARY OF POISSON’S RATIO FOR INTACT ROCK 
(AASHTO, MODIFIED AFTER KULHAWY, 1978) 
Poisson’s Ratio, v 
Rock Type 
No. of 
Values 
No. of 
Rock 
Types Maximum Minimum Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 
Granite 22 22 0.39 0.09 0.20 0.08 
Gabbro 3 3 0.20 0.16 0.18 0.02 
Diabase 6 6 0.38 0.20 0.29 0.06 
Basalt 11 11 0.32 0.16 0.23 0.05 
Quartzite 6 6 0.22 0.08 0.14 0.05 
Marble 5 5 0.40 0.17 0.28 0.08 
Gneiss 11 11 0.40 0.09 0.22 0.09 
Schist 12 11 0.31 0.02 0.12 0.08 
Sandstone 12 9 0.46 0.08 0.20 0.11 
Siltstone 3 3 0.23 0.09 0.18 0.06 
Shale 3 3 0.18 0.03 0.09 0.06 
Limestone 19 19 0.33 0.12 0.23 0.06 
Dolostone 5 5 0.35 0.14 0.29 0.08 
97 

 
TABLE 5-14: SUMMARY OF YOUNG’S MODULUS FOR INTACT  
ROCK (MODIFIED AFTER KULHAWY, 1978) 
Elastic Modulus, EIR 
(kPa x 106) 
Rock Type 
No. of 
Values 
No. of 
Rock 
Types Maximum Minimum Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 
Granite 26 26 99.97 6.41 52.67 24.48 
Diorite 3 3 111.69 17.10 51.36 42.68 
Gabbro 3 3 84.11 67.57 75.84 6.69 
Diabase 7 7 104.11 68.95 88.25 12.27 
Basalt 12 12 84.11 28.96 56.12 17.93 
Quartzite 7 7 88.25 36.47 66.12 16.00 
Marble 14 13 73.77 4.00 42.61 17.17 
Gneiss 13 13 82.05 28.47 61.09 15.93 
Slate 11 2 26.13 2.41 9.58 6.62 
Schist 13 12 68.95 5.93 34.27 21.92 
Phyllite 3 3 17.31 8.62 11.79 3.93 
Sandstone 27 19 39.16 0.62 14.69 8.20 
Siltstone 5 5 32.82 2.62 16.48 11.38 
Shale 30 14 38.61 0.01 9.79 10.00 
Limestone 30 30 89.63 4.48 39.30 25.72 
Dolostone 17 16 78.60 5.72 29.10 23.72 
 
Additional corrections can be made for complex geologic conditions.  The NHI Shallow 
Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Munfakh et al., 2000) includes discussion of layered 
and anisotropic rock conditions and methods for correcting the deformation calculation. 
The elastic modulus of IGMs and some rocks may be measurable by in situ testing with 
equipment such as the pressuremeter, the flat dilatometer, plate load tests or flat jacks.  The 
reader is referred to FHWA publications, including The Pressuremeter Test for Highway 
Applications (FHWA-IP-89-008) and The Flat Dilatometer Test (FHWA-SA-91-044), or the 
relevant ASTM test method for details regarding performance and interpretation of the in situ 
test data. 
Alternatively, some modulus values are available from various researchers based on the rock 
type.  Sources include Bieniawski (1984, 1989), Kulhawy (1975) and Lama and Vutukuri 
(1978).  Tables 5-13 and 5-14 summarize suggested values for Poisson’s ratio and elastic 
modulus as presented in AASHTO (1996) and modified after Kulhawy (1978). 
98 

5.4 SLIDING AND LATERAL STABILITY 
A shallow foundation will resist lateral loads by a combination of the shear resistance along the 
base of the footing and the lateral earth pressure that develops in front of the footing in the 
direction of loading.  The shear resistance along the base will develop its full capacity at very 
small deflections.  The lateral earth pressure is termed “passive resistance” and requires much 
larger deflections to develop the full passive capacity.  By the time the passive resistance is fully 
developed, the shearing resistance is fully mobilized and may even by reduced to some residual 
value less than the peak shearing resistance.  For this reason, the design of most shallow 
foundations conservatively ignores passive resistance. 
Sliding resistance between the base of a shallow foundation and a granular soil will be governed 
by the coefficient of friction (tan δ) that develops between the foundation soil and the footing.  
The value of the coefficient of friction is a function of the soil type and the roughness of the 
footing.  For concrete cast against cohesionless or granular material, the coefficient of friction, 
tan δ, will be equal to the tangent of the friction angle (tan φ) for the soil supporting the footing.  
If the bottom of the footing consists of something other than concrete cast against the ground, 
then the coefficient of friction (tan δ) is not solely a property of the soil but is also a function of 
the footing material type and roughness.  In the absence of specific data, Table 5-15 may be used 
to estimate the coefficient of friction between soil and various footing material types. 
 
TABLE 5-15: ULTIMATE FRICTION FACTORS FOR  
DISSIMILAR MATERIALS (NAVFAC, 1986B) 
 
Interface Materials 
Coefficient of 
Friction, tan δ 
Friction 
Angle, δ 
(degrees) 
Mass concrete on the following materials:   
Clean sound rock 0.70 35 
Clean gravel, gravel sand mixtures, coarse sand 0.55 to 0.60 29 to 31 
Clean fine to medium sand, silty medium to 
coarse sand, silty or clayey gravel 
0.45 to 0.55 24 to 29 
Clean fine sand, silty or clayey fine to medium 
sand 
0.35 to 0.45 19 to 24 
Fine sandy silt, nonplastic silt 0.30 to 0.35 17 to 19 
Very stiff and hard residual or preconsolidated 
clay 
0.40 to 0.50 22 to 26 
Medium stiff and stiff clay and silty clay 
(masonry on foundation materials has same 
friction factor) 
0.30 to 0.35 17 to 19 
 
99 

If the base of the footing rests on clay, the sliding resistance will be limited by the adhesion that 
develops between the bearing surface of the footing and the cohesive bearing material, ca.  In 
practice, ca is typically taken as equal to the undrained shear strength (cohesion, cu) of the clay. 
The general equation for sliding resistance for footings with planar bearing surfaces on frictional 
(drained) materials is: 
FR = (W + Pv) tan δ (5-38) 
where: FR = ultimate sliding resistance 
 W = weight of the footing and soil backfill over the footing 
 P v = loads applied to the top of the footing 
 δ = friction angle between the base of the footing and frictional bearing material 
The general equation for sliding resistance for footings with planar bearing surfaces on cohesive 
(undrained) materials is: 
FR = caBf (5-39) 
where: FR = ultimate sliding resistance 
 c a = adhesion between the base of the footing and cohesive bearing material 
 B f = footing width 
Because drained and undrained conditions will not occur simultaneously, Equations 5-38 and 5-
39 should not be combined for use at the same time. 
A minimum factor of safety (FS) of 1.5 against sliding should be used for design of bridge 
foundations: 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (5-40) 
where: FSsliding = factor of safety with respect to sliding 
 F R  = ultimate sliding resistance 
 F sliding = sum of horizontal loads acting to cause footing to slide 
Equations 5-38 and 5-39 assume the bottom surface of the footing is planar.  If sliding resistance 
as determined by Equation 5-39 for a footing on clay soils is insufficient, the footing width 
should be increased to provide additional sliding resistance.  If the footing width becomes 
impractical in terms of economic or constructability factors, consideration may be given to 
including a key constructed under the bearing surface of the footing.  A typical configuration of a 
key is shown in Figure 5-22.  Keys are typically difficult to construct while maintaining the 
intact shearing resistance of the soil adjacent to the key. 
In reality, keys constructed in granular soils are not very efficient in developing passive 
pressures in front of the key.  Due to the deflections required to develop passive pressures 
described above, the frictional shearing resistance will already be fully mobilized.  The effect of 
100 

a key in granular soils is more properly considered as increasing the effective length of the 
shearing surface. 
In stiff, overconsolidated clays and soft rock, the additional resistance provided by a key can be 
computed using Figure 5-22 and Equation 5-41. 
Pa 
Bf
 
Figure 5-22: Resistance Against Sliding from Keyed Foundation 
in Cohesive Soils and Soft Rock 
The general equation for sliding resistance of footings on cohesive soils provided with a key is: 
FR = p1u1fa P)ba(c)baB(c ++−  (5-41) 
where: FR = ultimate sliding resistance 
 c a = adhesion between the base of the footing and cohesive bearing material 
 B f = footing width 
 ba1  = distance from point a1 to point b 
 c u = undrained shear strength of cohesive soil 
 P p = passive resistance force 
5.5 GLOBAL STABILITY 
Global stability of shallow foundations should be evaluated when the geometry of the ground 
surface in any direction away from the footing suggests that the assumptions associated with the 
bearing capacity theory used to calculate the bearing capacity of the footing are not valid, and the 
stress applied by the footing loads is acting to destabilize the slope geometry.  Figure 5-23 
depicts slope configurations and footing locations that act to either improve or degrade the global 
stability of the slope. 
101 

 
 (a) (b) 
Figure 5-23:  Global Slope Stability with Respect to Shallow Foundation Locations 
(a) Footing Acting to Stabilize Slope, (b) Footing Acting to Destabilize Slope 
 
In cases where the stress applied by the footing acts to destabilize the slope, the global stability 
of the footing should be checked using limit equilibrium methods such as the method of slices 
(Bishop, 1955; or Spencer, 1967).   
Detailed guidance for the evaluation of slope stability is not included in this Circular.  The Soils 
and Foundation Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) includes fundamental 
discussion of slope stability analysis methods considering the presence of a loaded footing within 
the slope.  The reference work TRB Special Report 247: Landslides, Investigation and 
Mitigation (TRB, 1996) includes more detailed discussion on the analysis of global slope 
stability. 
 
102 

CHAPTER 6 
 
SHALLOW FOUNDATION DESIGN FOR BRIDGES 
This chapter presents the practical application of shallow foundation design for bridge structures.  
A design process is presented in a step-by-step format that will result in a satisfactory solution 
for most applications of shallow foundation bridge support.  The design process involves 
multiple engineering disciplines.  The discipline generally responsible for each design step is 
identified, whether it be geotechnical, structural, hydraulic, environmental or general civil. 
Worked foundation design examples that follow this process are included in Appendix B for 
spread footing support of bridge piers in the following applications: 
• Interior bridge pier supported on a spread footing founded in native soil 
• Integral stub abutment supported on compacted structural fill 
• Stub seat-type abutment footing supported in compacted structural fill 
• Full-height seat abutment founded in native soil 
• Interior bridge pier supported on a spread footing on native rock 
A discussion of the application of Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) to the design of 
spread footings is included in Appendix C.  The first and third examples in Appendix B are re-
worked in Appendix C using LRFD methodology. 
It should be noted that these examples are intended to convey one approach and process 
that can lead to a satisfactory design of bridge support on a shallow foundation.  The 
examples should not be construed as representations of the only approach that can lead to a 
satisfactory design.  Also note that the examples only check one or, at most, a few specific 
load cases.  In practice, every complete design should consider all applicable load cases. 
6.1 DESIGN PROCESS AND FLOW CHART 
The design process of a bridge supported on shallow foundations includes the steps shown in 
Table 6-1 and also in the design process flow chart, Figure 6-1. 
6.2 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The depth and size of a shallow foundation for support of a bridge need to be selected to ensure 
that the bearing materials are able to support the loads imparted without shear failure or 
excessive settlement.  This includes verifying that the bearing materials are nonliquefiable during 
earthquakes.  The base of the footing also needs to be below the frost depth for frost susceptible 
soils, and below the probable scour during a design high water extreme event. 
103 

 
TABLE 6-1: STEPS IN DESIGN PROCESS FOR BRIDGE 
SUPPORTED ON SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 
Step Design Activity Responsible Discipline(s) 
1. Develop preliminary bridge layout.  Establish the desired 
bridge type, size and location.  Define span lengths and pier 
locations, considering geometrical and environmental constraints. 
Structural, in coordination 
with general civil and 
environmental considerations 
and geotechnical for approach 
stability 
2. Determine the shallow foundation feasibility based on review of 
existing geologic and subsurface data.  Competent bearing 
material must be present within a reasonable distance from the 
ground surface.  A preliminary assessment of approach 
embankment stability should be conducted to evaluate potential 
impacts to abutment locations and span lengths (Section 4.1). 
Geotechnical, in coordination 
with structural, general civil 
and environmental 
3. A site reconnaissance with the structural and general civil 
engineer should be completed at this stage to evaluate 
constructability of foundation types (Section 4.2). 
Geotechnical, in coordination 
with structural, general civil 
and environmental 
4. Determine the depth of the footing so that it will not be 
susceptible to scour potential or frost (Section 6.2). 
Hydraulic, with geologic 
input from geotechnical 
5. Determine the loads applied to the footing and tolerable total 
and differential settlement for each pier (Section 6.3).   
Structural 
6. Determine the design soil properties from the subsurface 
exploration and laboratory testing program (Sections 4.3 and 
4.4). 
Geotechnical 
7. Calculate the allowable bearing capacity, considering both the 
potential for bearing capacity failure (Section 5.1) and settlement 
(Section 5.2) 
Geotechnical 
8. Calculate the allowable sliding and passive soil resistance 
(Section 5.4) for evaluating lateral stability of the footing. 
Geotechnical 
9. In cases where overall stability of the footing may govern the 
design (e.g., footings on or near slopes), perform a global 
stability analysis of the footing using service (unfactored) loads 
(Section 5.5).   
Geotechnical 
10. Size the footing dimensions using service (unfactored) loads and 
the effective footing dimensions (Section 6.4.1).   
Structural 
11. Check the stability of the footing for sliding and overturning 
using service loads (Sections 5.4 and 6.4). 
Structural 
12. Complete the structural design of the footing using factored 
loads per Load Factor Design requirements and assuming a 
trapezoidal distribution of contact pressure beneath the footing 
(Section 6.5).  The design should consider the moment at the face 
of the column, one-way shear and two-way shear.   
Structural 
 
104 

 
 
1.  Develop preliminary bridge 
layout (ST) 
2.  Review existing geologic and 
subsurface data (GT) 
3.  Site reconnaissance (GT) 
4.  Determine depth of footing for 
scour and frost protection 
(Hydraulic, GT) 
6.  Subsurface exploration and 
laboratory testing (GT) 
7. & 8. Calculate allowable bearing 
capacity, sliding and passive soil 
resistance (GT) 
9.  Check overall (global) stability 
using service (unfactored) loads 
(GT) 
11.  Check stability of footing for 
overturning and sliding (ST) 
5.  Determine loads applied to the 
footing (ST) 
10.  Size the footing using service 
(unfactored) loads (ST) 
12.  Complete structural design of 
the footing using factored loads (ST) ST – Structural 
GT – Geotechnical 
 
Figure 6-1:  Design Process Flow Chart – Bridge Shallow Foundation 
 
105 

6.2.1 Scour Potential and Depth 
Scour is localized erosion of the channel bed that occurs around flow obstructions such as piers 
and bridge abutments, at channel contractions such as bridges, and on the outside of channel 
bends.  It can also be the result of long-term erosion of the channel bed that can occur during a 
structure’s life. 
Scour is a site-specific process that is a function of the flow velocity and duration, the geometry 
of the structural elements exposed to the flow of water, the geomorphology of the channel and 
the properties of the foundation and channel bed materials.  The process of scour is complex.  A 
multidisciplinary team of hydraulic, geotechnical and structural engineers should evaluate the 
risk of scour-induced failure at each structure site. 
This section describes the assessment of scour susceptibility for spread footing foundations.  
Basic scour concepts and techniques for scour protection are presented.  The discussion focuses 
on scour at bridges, but concepts presented also apply to culverts, retaining walls and other 
transportation structures built near channels and rivers.  Information presented here is consistent 
with FHWA publications on stream stability and scour, and the reader is encouraged to read the 
following for a detailed discussion of scour analysis and scour countermeasure design: 
• HEC 20 – Stream Stability at Highway Structures (Lagasse et al., 2001a) 
• HEC 23 – Bridge Scour and Stream Instability Countermeasures (Lagasse et al., 2001b) 
Scour assessment requires a determination of the cumulative effects of the three main 
components of scour: aggradation/degradation, contraction scour and local scour.  It also requires 
an evaluation of potential changes in channel geometry and location that may occur during a 
structure’s design life. 
Aggradation and degradation are long-term changes in the channel bed elevation.  They can be 
caused by human activities within the watershed or naturally occurring changes in basin 
hydrology and geology.  “Aggradation” is an increase in channel bed elevation caused by an 
increase in sediment load or decrease in sediment transport in the watercourse.  It is common 
upstream of dams and reservoirs where flow velocities are reduced and sediment deposition 
tends to occur.  “Degradation” is a lowering of the channel bed that can be caused by reductions 
in sediment load or increases in a stream’s sediment transport.  Degradation is common in 
urbanizing basins due to increases in flood magnitude and flow duration.  It can also occur 
downstream of dams and in channels subject to aggregate mining, where sediment loads are 
reduced.  
Contraction scour is the lowering of the channel bed due to localized narrowing of a channel as 
caused by a bridge or culvert constriction or an encroachment, such as a bridge approach 
embankment, into the channel.  A channel contraction will cause a reduced flow area, an increase 
in velocity at the constriction and increased erosive power of the flow.  An increase in discharge 
in the main channel, as overbank flows return at the bridge opening, also increases contraction 
scour magnitude.   
106 

Local scour occurs at bridge piers and abutments due to complex flow patterns that occur in the 
vicinity of these obstructions.  Pier scour is caused by strong turbulence that occurs at the base of 
a pier as flows are deflected down toward the channel bed and accelerated around the pier.  Pier 
scour magnitude is related to pier width, pier shape and alignment to flow.  It is also related to 
the depth and velocity of the flow upstream of the structure.  Effective pier width is the most 
influential parameter and is a factor in most pier scour equations.  Greater effective pier widths 
result in deeper scour depth potential.  Abutment scour is caused by the turbulent mixing of 
flows in the channel with flows obstructed by the abutment. 
Natural channels continuously change shape and location within a floodplain. In addition to the 
vertical components of scour described above, the potential for changes in channel geometry and 
location must be assessed.  Channel migration can expose structures to flows not anticipated at 
the time of design.  It can also increase scour potential due to changes in flow direction or 
increase velocities at a structure.  A foundation located in a floodplain should be designed for the 
worst scour condition that can occur during its life.  If lateral stream migration could expose a 
shallow foundation or abutment, it should be designed for the same scour condition as 
foundations in the main channel. 
Scour can undermine shallow foundations or remove sufficient overburden to redistribute 
foundation forces causing foundation displacement and detrimental stresses to structural 
elements. Table 6-1 provides general guidelines for design of shallow foundations.  One of the 
hazards of placing a structure in a river or channel is the potential for scour around the 
foundations.   For new structures the foundation should be designed deep enough such that scour 
protection is not required (Richardson & Davis, 1995).  Deep foundation systems may be 
preferable from both constructability and/or cost perspectives.    
6.2.2 Scour Design Considerations for Shallow Foundations 
Richardson & Davis (1995) provides the following guidance on scour design considerations for 
shallow foundation support of bridges at stream crossings. 
a. Spread Footings on Soil 
• Ensure that the top of the footing is below the sum of the long-term degradation, 
contraction scour and lateral migration (excluding local scour). 
• Place the bottom of the footing below the total scour line. 
• The top of the footing can act as a local scour arrestor. 
b. Spread Footings on Rock Highly Resistant to Scour 
Place the bottom of the footing directly on the cleaned rock surface for massive rock 
formations (such as granite) that are highly resistant to scour.  Avoid small embedment 
(keying) since blasting to achieve keying frequently damages the rock structure beneath 
the footing and makes it more susceptible to scour.  Keys into softer rock or IGMs may 
be feasible using pneumatic and hydraulic excavation tools without detriment to the 
quality of the underlying bearing materials.  If footings on massive hard rock surfaces 
107 

require lateral constraint, steel dowels should be drilled and grouted into the rock below 
the footing level. 
c. Spread Footings on Erodible Rock or IGMs 
Weathered or other potentially erodible rock formations need to be carefully assessed for 
scour.  An engineering geologist familiar with the area geology should be consulted to 
determine if rock, soil or other criteria should be used to calculate the support for the 
spread footing foundation.  The decision should be based on an analysis of intact rock 
cores, including rock quality designations and local geology, as well as hydraulic data 
and anticipated structure life.  An important consideration may be the existence of a high 
quality rock formation below a thin, weathered zone.  For deep deposits of weathered 
rock, the potential scour depth should be estimated and the footing base placed below 
that depth.  Excavation into weathered rock should be made with care.  If blasting is 
required, light, closely spaced charges should be used to minimize overbreak beneath the 
footing level.  Loose rock pieces should be removed and the zone filled with clean 
concrete.  In any event, the final footing should be poured in contact with the sides of 
the excavation for the full designed footing thickness to minimize water intrusion below 
footing level.  Guidance on scourability of rock formations is given in FHWA 
memorandum “Scourability of Rock Formations,” dated July 19, 1991. 
AASHTO specification requires footings for stream piers and each abutment to be founded at 
least 1.8 m (6 ft) below the streambed.  For existing structures identified as scour susceptible, 
scour countermeasures are often required to protect foundations from scour conditions not 
identified at the time of design. 
There are four general types of scour protection: 
• Localized armoring 
• River training 
• Modifications to the foundations 
• Monitoring 
Localized armoring techniques include the following: 
• Rock riprap 
• Gabions and slope mattress 
• Pre-cast concrete blocks 
• Grouted riprap 
Discussion of other armoring systems, including concrete slope pavement, grouted fabric, 
sand/cement bags and soil cement, and a thorough treatise on current technology for stream 
instability and bridge scour countermeasures, are provided in HEC 23 (Lagasse et al., 2001b). 
108 

6.2.3 Frost Depth 
Footings founded in seasonal and permanently frozen grounds must be embedded below the 
depth of frost penetration (frost depth) to provide adequate frost protection.  This is required to 
prevent heaving of the footings due to volumetric expansions of the subgrade soils from freezing 
and/or to prevent settling due to loss of shear strength and stiffness from thawing. 
In general, for frost action to occur, the following conditions must apply: 
• Presence of frost-susceptible soil 
• Availability of water 
• Freezing conditions 
Fine-grained soils with low cohesion tend to be more frost susceptible.  Silty soil containing a 
high percentage of particles smaller than the No. 200 U.S. Standard sieve tends to have a 
network of pores and fissures that promote frost penetration.  Common frost-susceptible soils 
include silts (ML, MH), silty sands (SM) and low-plasticity clays (CL-CL/ML).  In regions 
where freezing of the ground occurs during the winter months, lenses of clear ice will form 
within the fine-grained soils and result in a sequence of frozen soil and ice.  If there is a source of 
water in liquid phase, such as a water table available under the frost depth, the water will be 
drawn toward these ice lenses by capillary and suction actions, further expanding the lenses, and 
consequently producing surface heave.  In addition, the degree of air temperature and duration of 
below-freezing temperatures also influence the depth of penetration.  The U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers proposed a relationship between frost penetration depth and the freezing index.  The 
“freezing index” is a product of the number of days below freezing and the average number of 
degrees below freezing during the freezing season.  Refer to Corps of Engineers’ Technical 
Manual TM 5-852-6 (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1988) for calculation methods to determine 
frost depths in soils. 
Footings should be located below the maximum depth of frost penetration to minimize the 
potential for freeze/thaw movements.  The maximum depth of frost penetration generally is 
established by local experience or from published maps.  The use of generalized maps showing 
large regions is discouraged.  Local building codes, agency design policy and experience should 
be consulted for appropriate design values.   
Discussion about special considerations for foundations in permanently frozen regions 
(permafrost regions) is beyond the scope of this document.  Readers are referred to Canadian 
Foundation Engineering Manual (1985) for special principles and practices needed for 
successful design and construction in cold environments. 
6.2.4 Expansive and Collapsible Soils 
Both expansive and collapsible soils are regional in occurrence.  Neither soil type is well suited 
for shallow foundation support without some sort of mitigation for the potential for large volume 
changes in these soils due to changes in moisture content.  Because deep foundations are 
frequently used for bridge support in both soil types, detailed guidance for ground treatment to 
permit use of shallow foundations for bridge support is not included here. 
109 

Expansive clays experience increases in volume due to increases in moisture content.  The 
magnitude of the volume change can cause severe damage to structures.  In general, deep 
foundations are preferred for bridge support in expansive soil terrain, unless the potential for the 
volume change can be mitigated.  The most common and effective strategy for mitigating 
expansion potential is to excavate and replace the expansive soil with sufficient nonexpansive 
material to counteract the swell potential.  This is generally practical only if a ready source of 
nonexpansive material is located nearby.  For approach embankment and abutment design, the 
expansion potential should be evaluated considering the construction and loads of both.  The 
Shallow Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Munfakh et al., 2000) provides the 
procedures for laboratory testing for expansion potential and analysis of the results. 
Collapsible soils, when dry, can provide adequate support for relatively high loads.  However, 
upon wetting after the load has been applied, the soils can experience dramatic decreases in 
volume.  It is most important to identify collapse potential of foundation soils at a bridge site.  
Due to the difficulties in obtaining undisturbed samples of these materials, exploration and 
testing alone may not identify the collapse potential.  Local experience and review of geologic 
mapping are therefore essential to identification of collapsible soil deposits. 
6.2.5 Drainage Considerations 
When a shallow foundation supports a stemwall, and there is a difference in elevation of the 
backfill on either side of the stemwall so that unbalanced lateral earth pressures will act on the 
stemwall, the footing and the stemwall combine to function as a retaining structure.  This is a 
typical configuration for bridge abutments.  As with most retaining structures, the material 
retained by the structure should be drained such that hydrostatic pressures do not also act against 
the abutment. 
Abutments are important structures that perform multiple functions.  Drainage details, including 
weep holes and perforated drainage pipes, are an essential inclusion in the plans and 
specifications.  Most highway agencies use standard details and specifications to ensure adequate 
drainage behind abutments. 
Additional discussion of abutment and retaining wall drainage requirements and construction 
details are provided in Chapter 9. 
6.2.6 Seismic Considerations and Dynamic Stability 
Seismic hazards should be assessed as part of the foundation type selection process.  Shallow 
foundations are susceptible to excessive movements or damage if the bearing soils are subject to 
liquefaction or lateral spreading due to an earthquake.  GEC No. 3, Geotechnical Earthquake 
Engineering for Highways (Kavazanjian et al., 1997), presents guidance on assessing seismic 
hazards at a site, including evaluation of liquefaction and lateral spreading potential.  In general, 
shallow foundations will not be an appropriate choice for support of bridge piers when there is 
potential for liquefaction to develop under the design seismic event unless the liquefaction 
potential is mitigated by ground improvement.  Refer to Munfakh et al., (2000) for discussion of 
design and construction techniques to improve poor ground conditions and allow use of spread 
footings. 
110 

If liquefaction and lateral spreading are not expected at a site, shallow foundations may be a 
suitable and cost-effective choice for support of a bridge, provided the foundation is designed to 
adequately resist the seismic loading conditions appropriate for the design event.  Seismic design 
checks should, at a minimum, include the following (others may also apply): 
• Design for seismic loads that act through the column or stemwall to the footing.  A 
minimum factor of safety of about 1.0 to 1.15 should be maintained against bearing 
capacity or sliding failure of the footing.   
• AASHTO (1996) permits eccentricity due to seismic loading to fall within the middle 
two-thirds (2/3) of the footing, based on a trapezoidal distribution of earth pressure (see 
Section 6.4).  However, equivalent rectangular soil pressure distribution is recommended 
for sizing footings in this GEC; therefore, when using the rectangular pressure 
distribution, the seismic eccentricity should be kept within the middle one-half of the 
footing. 
• Recall that seismic loads act in opposite directions at different times during the 
earthquake.  Be sure to check for stability (overturning and sliding) as well as bearing 
capacity using loads applied in the direction that results in the most critical condition.  
Check to see if the foundation experiences uplift.  A deep foundation may be needed to 
resist uplift forces. 
• Design for seismic lateral earth pressures that can act on the footing.  This is typically 
done using the Mononobe–Okabe equations as described in AASHTO (1996, 1998). 
• Check global stability of any slope that supports the footing, or is supported by the 
footing, by including a seismic coefficient in the slip circle or other method of calculating 
a factor of safety of a slope.  In general, the calculated factor of safety should be greater 
than 1.0 when the applied horizontal seismic coefficient is one-half the peak ground 
acceleration (Hynes-Griffin & Franklin, 1984). 
6.3 LOADS 
Calculation of loads applied to shallow foundations is presented in AASHTO (1996, 1998).  
Numerous load groups provide for a variety of possible loading conditions and also consider the 
special loading requirements of non-routine structures, such as long span bridges.  A summary of 
load cases and the conditions they are intended to check is included in Table 6-2. 
The designer should be aware of the possibility that a non-codified loading condition may 
actually control the design of a foundation.  For instance, the construction sequence and methods 
should be considered when evaluating the critical load case for a shallow foundation.  If an 
abutment may be fully backfilled prior to application of the superstructure loads, the overturning 
load of the backfill may be the most critical loading condition the foundation must ever resist. 
 
111 

 
TABLE 6-2:  SERVICE LOAD DESIGN LOAD GROUPS 
Load Group Description 
Groups I though III check the structure without consideration for long term creep, shrinkage, 
shortening, or thermal movements.   
I Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge without wind. 
IA Load combination for vehicles smaller than an H 20 using the bridge without 
wind. 
IB Load combination with permit vehicles using the bridge without wind. 
II Load combination with maximum wind, without vehicles. 
III Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge with wind. 
Groups IV to VI check the structure with consideration for long term movements.   
IV Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge without wind, and with 
consideration of long term shrinkage, shortening, and thermal movements. 
V Load combination with maximum wind without vehicles, and with consideration 
of long term shrinkage, shortening, and thermal movements. 
VI Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge with wind, and with 
consideration of long term shrinkage, shortening, and thermal movements. 
Group VII is for seismic loading.   
VII Load combination for seismic loading. 
Groups VIII and IX check the structure for ice loads on the piers.   
VIII Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge without wind and ice 
acting on the bridge. 
IX Load combination with maximum wind and ice, and without vehicles. 
Group X is for culvert design, the other load groups do not apply to culverts. 
X Load combination for culverts with normal vehicles using the culvert. 
 
112 

6.3.1 Vertical Loads and Pressures 
Vertical loads should be calculated in accordance with the design specification selected as the 
design criteria for the project.  Calculation of infrequent loads, such as seismic, should consider 
the potential range of soil and ground water conditions that may exist under and around the 
footing over the life span of the structure.  It is important to ensure that the structure will perform 
well over the range of expected conditions that may occur, considering the potential for the 
following:  
• Seasonal variations in ground water level 
• Variation in the depth of cover over a footing due to scour or excavation 
• Increased loads due to changes in permitted loads or the addition of overlays 
• Intermediate construction conditions or equipment loading that may exceed design live 
loads 
Section 5.2.2 discusses the concepts of gross and net bearing pressures.  An additional 
consideration that is related to the concept of net bearing pressure is the calculation of loads due 
to the self-weight of the footing and the backfill over the footing. 
Consider a footing constructed in an excavation below existing grade and then subsequently 
backfilled.  The increase in stress experienced by the soil below the bearing elevation will be the 
net increase due to a change in the unit weight of material that is replaced over the top.  This is 
usually only due to the concrete in the footing itself, unless a specified select backfill material 
replaces the soil excavated to construct the footing.  Because the concrete has a higher unit 
weight than the soil it replaces, there is slight increase in bearing stress below the footing.  For 
most applications, including bridge foundations, this effect is usually less than one or two 
percent of the loads applied by the column and is therefore commonly ignored.   
Alternatively, consider the effect of a mat foundation constructed well below the existing grade.  
In this case, the soil removed during construction is replaced largely by air, so there is potentially 
a net decrease in the stress due solely to the self-weight of the shallow foundation and the lack of 
backfill. 
The decision to include or ignore the effect of the footing self-weight and backfill should be 
evaluated on a case-by-case basis considering the following effects that the increase in stress will 
have on the design conditions checked while sizing the footing: 
• The bearing stress increases, so the factor of safety with respect to bearing capacity will 
decrease, and the settlement will also potentially increase.  These are undesirable effects.  
If the effect of self-weight is more than one or two percent of the applied column or 
structure loads, the weight should be included when sizing the footing. 
• The effect of a net stress increase on eccentricity (overturning) or sliding of a footing will 
be to stabilize the foundation.  It is therefore conservative to ignore the increase when 
computing the factor of safety against overturning (eccentricity), or sliding. 
Mat foundations below grade with no backfill will experience the opposite effects. 
113 

6.3.2 Lateral Loads and Pressures 
The transfer of shear applied by the column may apply lateral loads on a shallow foundation.  
The computation of these loads should be done in accordance with the appropriate section of 
AASHTO or the selected design criteria.  For the case of abutments that retain fill, the lateral 
earth pressures and associated design loads must also be computed to size and design the footing. 
Lateral earth pressures are determined based on the characteristics of the fill material behind the 
abutment.  The different states of stress that should be considered include active, at-rest, passive 
and seismic.  Computation of seismic earth pressures is not included here.  The reader is referred 
to GEC No. 3, Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering for Highways (Kavazanjian et al., 1997) 
for design guidance on calculating lateral earth pressures due to seismic loads.  In addition, a soil 
pressure distribution has to be determined for traffic surcharge.  For the active, passive and at-
rest states, the pressure distribution can be assumed to be triangular, with the resultant applied at 
H/3 from the bottom of the footing.  The general equation for computing lateral loads due to 
lateral earth pressures is: 
2HK2
1P γ′=  (6-1) 
where:  P = Lateral load, typically computed per unit length of wall or abutment 
 K = Lateral earth pressure coefficient 
 γ′ = Effective unit weight of soil acting against the wall or abutment 
 H = Height of retained backfill behind the wall or abutment 
The lateral load will be computed based on the earth pressure condition expected to develop 
behind the wall or abutment, active, at-rest or passive.  The loads and the lateral earth pressure 
coefficients are typically written with a subscript of ‘a,’ ‘o’ or ‘p,’ for active, at-rest, or passive 
earth pressure, respectively, to denote the earth pressure computed. 
6.3.2.1 Active Pressure Distribution 
The pressure distribution is determined using calculations based on Coulomb theory.  The active 
pressure coefficient, Ka, is computed from Equation 6-2.  This is the general case for Coulomb 
lateral earth pressure theory.  It does not account for surcharge or seismic loads. 
2
2
2
a
)cos()cos(
)'sin()'sin(1)cos(cos
)'(cosK






β−θδ+θ
β−φδ+φ+δ+θθ
θ−φ=  (6-2) 
where:  Ka = Active earth pressure coefficient 
 δ  =  Wall/backfill interface friction angle 
 β  =  Angle of backfill slope behind the wall to the horizontal (β = 0o for horizontal 
backfill surface 
 θ  = Angle of back wall face inclination (θ = 0o for vertical wall face) 
 φ′ = Effective angle of internal friction for the soil 
114 

Figure 6-2 shows these terms. 
For the case of a vertical wall (no batter) and where the ground surfaces above and below the 
wall are level, the active pressure coefficient may be calculated using the simpler Rankine 
equation: 
Ka = 



 φ−° 2
'45tan2  (6-3) 
where:  Ka = Active earth pressure coefficient 
 φ′ = Effective angle of internal friction for the soil 
The Rankine equation assumes no friction between the wall and the soil backfill.  Note that 
Equation 6-3 does not include consideration for surcharge or seismic loads. 
H/3
H
θ
Pa
δ
β
γ, φ'
 
Figure 6-2: Coulomb Lateral Earth Pressure Definitions 
6.3.2.2 At-Rest Pressure Distribution 
The at-rest coefficient can be determined from the following equation developed by Mayne and 
Kulhawy (1982): 
Ko = (  (6-4) )sin()OCR)(sin1 φ′φ′−
where: Ko = At-rest pressure coefficient 
 φ′ = Effective angle of internal friction for the soil 
 OCR = Overconsolidation (preconsolidation) ratio (see Section 5.3.3) 
Some agencies design abutment walls for at-rest earth pressures.  However, if the wall is free to 
rotate such that the displacement at the top of the abutment is about 0.2 percent of the height of 
the wall (i.e., 0.002H), then active earth pressures can be assumed to develop. 
115 

6.3.2.3 Passive Pressure Distribution 
The passive pressure distribution should be determined for special abutment cases.  The passive 
pressure is generally ignored in front of the abutment due to the large lateral displacements 
required to fully mobilize passive lateral earth pressures and the potential for poor compaction or 
subsequent removal of the backfill.  The passive earth pressure coefficient may be computed 
using Coulomb earth pressure theory or estimated from charts such as Figures 5.5.2C and 5.5.2D 
in the AASHTO “Standard Specifications” (1996). 
6.3.2.4 Equivalent Fluid Methods 
The AASHTO “Standard Specifications” (1996) state that structures that resist loads due to 
lateral earth pressures should not be designed for less than an equivalent fluid weight of 4.8 
kN/m3 (30 pounds per cubic foot).  If the above methods yield pressures lower than this 
equivalent fluid weight, the equivalent fluid pressure should be used as a minimum.  Note that 
these earth pressures only apply to gravity and semi-gravity cantilever walls. 
6.3.2.5 Live Load Surcharge 
If live loads (traffic) can occur within a horizontal distance behind the top of a wall or abutment 
wall equal to one-half of the wall height (measured from the heel of the footing), the lateral load 
for design should be increased to account for the additional lateral earth pressure that will act on 
the wall. 
The live load surcharge is estimated as an equivalent soil surcharge behind the wall or abutment.  
However, if there is an approach slab, the live loads are applied to the corbel on the abutment 
backwall.  The equivalent height of soil to use in calculating the live load surcharge is 0.6 m (2 
ft).  The unit weight for this imaginary surcharge is typically taken as 19.6 kN/m3 (125 pcf).  The 
pressure distribution from this equivalent soil height is uniform along the back of the wall, and 
the resultant is halfway up from the base of the wall.  The lateral load due to live load surcharge 
is then calculated as: 
PLS = HhK eqγ′  (6-5) 
where P LS = Lateral load due to live load surcharge, in units of force per unit length of wall 
 K = Lateral earth pressure coefficient, either at-rest, Ko, or active, Ka 
 γ′ = Effective unit weight of soil acting against the wall or abutment 
 h eq = Equivalent height of soil surcharge representing live load (0.6 m) 
 H = Height of retained backfill behind the wall or abutment 
The general loading configuration for lateral earth pressures acting on walls or abutments is 
shown in Figure 6-3. 
116 

H/3
0.5 H
Active Earth
Pressure, pa
Traffic
Surcharge, pLS
PA
PLS
 
Figure 6-3:  Lateral Earth Pressures on Abutments 
6.4 SIZING THE FOOTING 
Once all the loads acting on the footing have been calculated, the footing should be sized such 
that: 
• The footing is stable under eccentrically applied loads (i.e., the footing will not overturn) 
and such that negative contact stress does not develop beneath the footing (soil cannot 
transfer tensile stress).  This is determined by computing the effective footing dimensions 
(Section 6.4.1). 
• The maximum applied bearing stress is less than the allowable bearing capacity, 
considering the potential for both shear failure and settlement.  This is determined using 
the effective footing area computed per Section 6.4.1 and comparing it with the 
calculated allowable bearing capacity (Section 6.4.2). 
• The footing will not slide due to lateral loads (Section 6.4.3). 
6.4.1 Effective Footing Dimensions and Overturning Stability 
Eccentric loading occurs when a footing is subjected to a combination of vertical loads and 
moments, or moments induced by shear loads transferred to the footing.  Abutments and 
retaining wall footings are examples of footings subjected to this type of load condition.  
Moments can also be applied to interior column footings due to skewed superstructures, impact 
117 

loads from vessels or ice, seismic loads or loading in any sort of continuous frame.  The effect of 
the eccentric load is to distribute the load over a smaller area than the entire footing area.  The 
eccentricity correction is usually applied by reducing the width (Bf) and length (Lf) such that: 
B′f = Bf – 2eB (6-6) 
L′f = Lf – 2eL (6-7) 
In these equations, eB and eL are the eccentric distances (Figure 6-4) in the Bf and Lf directions, 
respectively, and are computed by dividing the applied moment by the applied vertical load.  
Recall that it is important to maintain consistent sign conventions and coordinate directions.  The 
reduced footing dimensions B′f and L′f are termed the effective footing dimensions.  When 
eccentric load occurs in both directions, the bearing pressure is assumed to act over a fictitious 
area (A') of the footing (AASHTO, 1998): 
A′= B′f L′f (6-8) 
Figure 6-4:  Notations for Footings Subjected to Eccentric,  
Inclined Loads (after Kulhawy, 1983) 
Note that the concept of effective footing dimensions and area is an approximation made to 
account for eccentric loading and is not representative of the actual stress distribution under a 
footing subjected to eccentric loads.  Structural design of the footing is performed using 
trapezoidal or triangular stress distributions that more conservatively model the stress 
distribution under an eccentrically loaded footing as described in Section 6.6.  A comparison of 
the two loading distributions is shown in Figure 6-5. 
118 

 
 (a) (b) 
Figure 6-5:  Eccentrically Loaded Footing with (a) Linear Pressure Distribution (Structural 
Design) and (b) Equivalent Uniform Pressure Distribution (Sizing the Footing) 
Footings on soil should be designed such that the eccentricity in any direction (eB or eL) is less 
than one-sixth (1/6) of the (actual) footing dimension in the same direction to ensure that zero 
contact pressure does not exist beneath the footing (AASHTO, 1996).  For footings on rock, the 
eccentricity should be less than one-fourth (1/4) of the (actual) footing dimension.  If the 
eccentricity does not exceed these limits, separate calculation for stability with respect to 
overturning need not be performed. 
6.4.2 Allowable Bearing Stress 
Using the procedures in Sections 5.2 and 5.3, an allowable bearing capacity should be computed 
that provides a minimum factor or safety of 3.0 against bearing failure in shear and limits the 
settlement of the footing to a tolerable amount.  It is typically convenient to present the allowable 
bearing capacity as a range of bearing stresses plotted as a function of (effective) footing widths.  
Alternatively, settlements could be computed and tabulated for a variety of applied stresses and 
footing widths. 
An acceptable footing design may be obtained by sizing the footing such that the applied bearing 
stress over the effective footing area, A′, assuming a rectangular pressure distribution, is less 
than the allowable bearing pressure computed using the procedures in Chapter 5.  Because the 
pressure distribution is assumed to be uniform, Bf in Equation 5-14 may be replaced by B′f. 
6.4.3 Sliding 
The loads that act laterally on the footing should be compared to the allowable sliding resistance 
computed according to the procedures in Section 5.4.  If the computed factor of safety is less 
than 1.5, the footing width should be increased.  Addition of a key may also be considered, 
keeping in mind the limitations of key construction and effectiveness described in Section 5.4. 
119 

6.5 DESIGN OF SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS FOR INFREQUENT TRANSIENT LOADS 
Bridge design may need to include consideration of loading conditions that rarely, if ever, occur 
during the life of the structure.  Some of these load conditions can impose large loads on the 
structure and the foundations.  Examples of loads that may impact bridge design include ice load, 
wind load, vessel impact and, notably, earthquake or seismic loads.  These large loads can 
control the design and size of a foundation. 
The performance objective of the structure, and therefore the foundations, should be selected 
before establishing the design criteria for the structure.  It may be considered that structural 
collapse is not acceptable, but that some structural damage is tolerable if one of these transient 
loads is applied to the structure. 
The concept of allowable bearing capacity that includes consideration of limiting both bearing 
failure in shear and settlement does not lend itself to design for infrequent transient loads.  If 
some structural damage, but no collapse, is considered an acceptable result from the application 
of such a load, it is not reasonable to design the foundations for total settlement (i.e., settlement 
due to “normal” loads plus any additional settlement due to the transient load) that is limited to, 
say, 25 mm (1 in). 
When considering infrequent transient loads Service Load Design provisions include an 
allowance for overstress above the allowable capacity of a member.  For soils, however, the 125 
to 150 percent overstress allowance means that there is still a factor of safety against a collapse 
(bearing failure in shear) of at least 2.0.  Compared to other construction materials, such as 
concrete and steel, this is still a large margin of safety under this type of load.  The design codes 
have evolved, and will continue to evolve, with regard to achieving consistent levels of 
performance and safety.  One step in this process is AASHTO’s adoption of the Load and 
Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) methodology (AASHTO, 1998), which includes provisions for 
considering the performance of a structure under typical, or service loads, that are generally 
controlled by deflection (e.g., settlement), and strength or extreme event loads that may be 
controlled by the ultimate strength of a material (e.g., ultimate bearing capacity).  Further 
discussion of the LRFD method as applied to shallow foundations is included in Appendix C. 
6.5.1 Soil–Structure Interaction Analyses and Shallow Foundation Stiffness 
An additional consideration for shallow foundations designed to resist large, transient loads is the 
effect of soil–structure interaction.  The loads calculated for a structure subjected to a large 
transient load will depend on how the structure responds to the application of the load.  The 
structure response is, in turn, dependent on the stiffness of the foundation and the foundation 
soils.  An accurate prediction of the loads will depend on an accurate prediction of the 
foundation stiffness. 
Of particular interest to designers is the response of foundations to transient lateral loads, such as 
those applied by seismic loads or vessel impact.  For shallow foundations, the foundation 
stiffness will therefore be a function of the shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the soil.  A 
detailed description of evaluating soil and foundation stiffnesses is not included here.  The reader 
is referred to GEC No. 3: Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering for Highways (Kavazanjian et 
120 

al., 1997) and the course materials and design examples developed for National Highway 
Institute’s Seismic Design of Bridges (Mast et al., 1996) for guidance on calculating foundation 
loads due to transient lateral forces. 
6.6 STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF THE FOOTING 
The contact pressure beneath a spread footing is, in reality, a function of the stiffness of the 
footing and the compressibility and strength of the soil.  However, the most common practical 
approach is to assume that the footing is rigid with a linear distribution of contact pressure.  This 
results in either a trapezoidal or triangular shaped contact pressure distribution, as shown in 
Figure 6-6.  The maximum and minimum pressures beneath the footing can be computed using 
Equations 6-9 through 6-13. 
 
 (a) (b) 
Figure 6-6:  Contact Pressure for Footing Loaded Eccentrically About One Axis: 
(a) for eL ≤ Lf/6, and (b) for Lf/6 < eL < Lf/2 (AASHTO, 1996) 
For eL < Lf/6: 
fffLmax L/B)]/L(e6  1Q[q +=  (6-9) 
fffLmin L/B)]/L(e6  1Q[q −=  (6-10) 
121 

For Lf /6 < eL < Lf /2: 
])e)2/L[(B3/(Q2q Lffmax −=  (6-11)  
0  qmin =  (6-12)  
]e - /2)3[(L  L Lf1 =  (6-13) 
where: L 1 = the length of the triangular-shaped contact pressure distribution 
Note:  When the eccentricity is in the Bf direction, the minimum and maximum contact pressures 
are computed with Equations 6-9 through 6-13 by replacing eL with eB, Lf with Bf, and Bf with 
Lf.   
The structural design of the footing should then be performed in accordance with Section 8 of the 
AASHTO Standard Specifications (1996).  The soil pressures used for this design are the 
customary trapezoidal or triangular pressures shown in Figure 6-6 and calculated using 
Equations 6-9 through 6-13, not the equivalent uniform rectangular pressures used to size the 
footing dimensions.  The following failure modes should be considered during structural design 
of the footing: 
• Consider the moment in the footing as a function of the column connection (i.e., pinned, 
fixed or sliding, an equivalent rectangular column is used). 
• Increase moment (flexural) steel in the short direction as specified in the AASHTO 
Standard Specifications (1996). 
• When compression is induced at the face of the column, investigate shear at “d” away 
from the column face in compression (where “d” is the full depth of the footing).  If 
tension is induced at the face of the column, investigate shear at the face of the column. 
• Consider punching or two-way shear around the column. 
For abutments, each of the structural elements is designed similar to spread footings.  In addition, 
the backwall and stem wall are designed for the design soil pressures that can be applied.  
Wingwalls, if included, are designed for the maximum soil pressures that can be applied.  The 
connection of the wingwall to the stem wall is critical so that it will not fracture. 
 
122 

CHAPTER 7 
 
MINOR STRUCTURE SUPPORT ON SHALLOW 
FOUNDATIONS 
Transportation projects frequently include minor structures such as signs, signals and 
illumination.  Because these structures are both relatively tall and lightweight, the controlling 
load for design of their foundations is nearly always overturning due to wind loading or 
cantilever arms.  As a result, the moments applied at the foundation connection tend to be large 
as compared to the axial load due to the dead weight of the structure. 
Spread footings must resist these moments by transferring the moment to an effective bearing 
area that is small due to the large eccentricity; therefore, spread footings tend to be large for 
support of signs, signals and illumination.  Most agencies have developed standard plans for 
supporting minor structures on small, shaft-type foundations that are more efficient at resisting 
the applied lateral shears and moments than spread footings because they spread the load over a 
large, lateral surface area. 
However, there are some ground conditions, such as very soft soils, that may lend themselves to 
minor structure support on a spread footing.  Because the axial loads are not very large for minor 
structures, settlement considerations may not govern the allowable bearing capacity.  An 
example might be a deep soft clay or organic silt deposit that provides poor near-surface lateral 
resistance against a shaft or pile foundation.  In this situation a large spread footing could be a 
cost-effective alternate to a pile group. 
7.1 GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION 
The geotechnical investigation for minor structures should include the same considerations as 
presented in Chapter 4, but the depth and frequency of explorations may be reduced according to 
identified similar geologic conditions for groups of structures. 
7.2 ALLOWABLE BEARING STRESSES 
Allowable bearing stresses for minor structure support on shallow foundations follow the same 
principles and procedures presented in Chapter 5.  
7.2.1 Settlement Limitations 
Settlement considerations for minor structures should include determining how much the 
foundation might tilt when supporting a tall, slender structure.  Visually perceptible tilt of signals 
and illumination towers, while not necessarily a problem for the function of the structure, will 
certainly be noticeable, and reported, by the public.  As mentioned above, however, the 
 123

controlling design load may be wind, which is transient and therefore not likely to be of 
sufficient duration to induce consolidation settlement of cohesive soils.  If the structure includes 
a cantilever arm, however, consolidation settlement should be computed and kept within 
tolerable limits. 
The potential for differential settlement of sign bridge supports should be checked if the applied 
bearing stresses are sufficient to induce consolidation settlement. 
7.2.2 Bearing Capacity Limitations 
As mentioned in the introduction to this section, shallow foundations for minor structures may be 
cost-effective when deep, soft soils are present.  Punching shear mechanisms can develop in 
these types of soils.  This is a situation in which the one-third reduction in the soil strength 
parameters discussed in Section 5.2.3.6 should be included when computing the ultimate bearing 
capacity. 
7.3 OVERTURNING 
As mentioned in Section 6.4.1, the factor of safety against overturning does not need to be 
calculated if the eccentricity is within certain prescribed limits that ensure negative bearing stress 
does not occur.  For lightweight structures that have large overturning moments, these design 
criteria may be overly conservative.  Recall that the assumption of the actual distribution of 
stress beneath a spread footing is that the footing is perfectly rigid with respect to the soil.  For 
wide spread footings that would be needed to withstand the overturning moment applied by, say, 
a signal mast arm, the assumption of perfect rigidity is not valid.  Both the footing and the 
supporting soil will deform under the applied load, and the stresses will redistribute accordingly.  
If the eccentricity is allowed to exceed the limits stated in Section 6.4.1 for a minor structure 
foundation, then a separate computation for overturning should be performed.  A minimum 
factor of safety against overturning (i.e., the resisting moments divided by the moments acting to 
overturn the structure) should be greater than about 2.0 for permanent dead loads and greater 
than about 1.5 for infrequent transient loads such as the maximum wind force. 
7.4 SLIDING 
The design of shallow foundations supporting minor structures should be checked, following the 
procedures in Sections 5.4 and 6.4, so that sliding will not occur. 
 124

CHAPTER 8 
 
SHALLOW FOUNDATION DESIGN FOR BUILDINGS 
Foundation design for buildings is typically performed in accordance with the current version of 
the Uniform Building Code (UBC) or the International Building Code (IBC).  These codes 
provide minimum criteria for design of building foundations, including considerations for frost 
protection; maximum presumptive bearing stresses; and dead, live, wind, seismic and other 
loads. 
8.1 GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION 
The field and laboratory procedures for geotechnical investigation of a building site are the same 
as described in Chapter 4.  The extent of sampling and testing should be commensurate with the 
performance expectation and importance of the structure.  A maintenance facility, for instance, 
may include several one- and two-story structures, including an equipment bay, that are 
constructed as slabs-on-grade with spread footing support of lightweight column and wall loads.  
The subsurface investigation for this type of facility should be sufficient to describe the vertical 
and lateral extent and variability of foundation bearing soils beneath the structures.  A 1,500 to 
2,000 m2 facility will typically require a minimum of three to five borings or test pits that extend 
at least 3 to 9 m (10 to 30 ft).  The required quantity of subsurface information will depend on 
the geotechnical engineer’s confidence that the subsurface conditions are adequately defined to 
proceed with confidence in designing a shallow foundation system. 
8.2 SHALLOW FOUNDATION TYPES 
The types of shallow foundations used to support buildings are similar to those described in 
Chapter 2, with the notable difference being generally much smaller dimensions. 
8.2.1 Isolated Spread Footings 
Isolated spread footings are frequently used to support individual or occasionally multiple 
column loads for buildings.  Depending on the anticipated potential for differential movements 
or the potential for high floor loads, the footings may or may not be constructed integral with 
slabs-on-grade.  It may be preferable for slabs to bear on the subgrade soils independently from 
footings.  For lightly loaded structures on compressible soil, it can be economical to partially 
overexcavate the poor foundation soils and replace them with compacted granular backfill to 
limit the potential for settlement or bearing capacity problems. 
 125

8.2.2 Continuous Strip Footings 
Continuous strip footings are frequently used to support perimeter and load-bearing walls.  
Where designed and constructed continuous with slabs-on-grade, the footings can be built as 
thickened edges to achieve the minimum depth requirements for bearing capacity and frost 
protection. 
8.2.3 Mat Foundations 
Mats are heavily reinforced concrete foundations that usually cover the entire plan area of a 
building.  Mat foundations may be designed to minimize differential settlements.  Mats are 
usually more economical and preferable when column loads are so large that more than 50 
percent of the plan area would be covered by spread footings (Peck et al., 1974).  Mats can be 
used to create deep basements, distribute column loads more uniformly and provide basement 
slabs (water barrier).  Mats may be used when the foundation soil has a low bearing capacity or 
large differential settlements are anticipated. 
Mats, by design, are rigid elements that distribute column and wall loads over a larger area, thus 
reducing the magnitude of the vertical stress on the foundation soil.  This not only decreases the 
stress but also produces a more uniform settlement profile and subsequently reduces differential 
settlement.  Figures 8-1(a) and (b) present the pressure distribution profiles versus depths for 
footing and mat foundations, respectively, assuming that the total load from the superstructure is 
the same for both a and b.  As shown in Figure 8-1, the applied stress on the subgrade soil 
directly below the spread footings is higher than directly below the mat; however, this condition 
reverses with depth.  Additionally, a mat foundation is preferred for a subsurface soil profile 
containing erratic changes in strength and/or stiffness (Figure 8-2) because the mat tends to 
bridge over these erratic loose zones better than isolated footings and is expected to undergo 
smaller differential displacements (about 50 percent less). 
PRESSURE
DISTRIBUTION  
Figure 8-1:  Distribution of Pressure in Soil Beneath Buildings Supported by 
(a) Widely Spaced Footings and (b) Concrete Mat 
 
 126

POCKETS OF LOOSE SAND
WITHIN DENSE SAND PRESSURE INFLUENCE
 
Figure 8-2:  Mat Foundation on a Dense Sand Stratum with Erratic  
Distribution of Pockets of Loose Sand 
8.3 ALLOWABLE BEARING STRESSES 
8.3.1 Settlement Limitations 
Tolerable total and differential movements for buildings, like bridges, are strongly a function of 
the materials and methods used to construct the building.  Steel frame buildings are capable of 
withstanding surprisingly large differential movements without experiencing structural distress 
or damage.  However, such movement may result in objectionable appearances of wall facings 
and coverings.  Masonry structures, on the other hand, are relatively settlement intolerant and 
may experience structural distress (cracking) if angular distortions exceed 1/300. 
In practice, bearing stresses are typically limited so that total settlements are on the order of 25 
mm (1 in) and differential settlements about half the total settlement. 
In designing building foundations, considerable benefits can be derived by permanently 
excavating a portion of the soil by including a basement.  This reduces the net increase in 
stresses on the subgrade, which in turn reduces or eliminates consolidation even in normally 
consolidated soils.   
8.3.2 Bearing Capacity Limitations 
Due to the relatively small width of spread footings for buildings, the potential for bearing 
capacity failure may control the design of footings, especially foundations on clay.  Knowing 
that most building foundations for lightweight one- and two-story frame construction have 
widths of about 0.5 to 1.0 m, and referring to Figure 5-1, it can be seen that these values fall to 
the left, in the bearing capacity limited portion of the chart. 
 127

8.4 OVERTURNING AND ECCENTRICITY 
Spread footings for buildings are designed to maintain a minimum factor of safety against 
overturning of at least 1.5.  Eccentricity may also be checked using the procedures in Chapter 6, 
although this is generally not part of the code requirements for design of buildings. 
8.5 SLIDING AND PASSIVE RESISTANCE 
The procedures for calculating sliding and passive resistance for building spread footings are 
described in Chapter 5.  A minimum factor of safety of 1.5 should be provided for sliding 
stability.  Due to the generally small width of spread footings used for buildings, inclusion of the 
passive resistance may be necessary.  Because of the differences in strains required to develop 
sliding and passive resistance, as described in Section 5.4, a practical approach is to include only 
one-half of the computed passive resistance when combining both sliding and passive 
components.  For narrow footing widths, simply deepening the footing to increase passive 
resistance may be more practical than attempting construction of a key. 
8.6 DESIGN OF MAT FOUNDATIONS AND FLOOR SLABS 
The design of mat foundations should account for bearing capacity, as well as immediate and 
long-term settlements.  The bearing capacity and settlement of a mat foundation may be 
determined using the methods presented in Chapter 5.  Due to the large size of mat foundations, 
bearing capacity will generally not govern design.  Controlling deflections will usually be the 
most critical aspect of design.  Mat settlements can be controlled to some degree with the lower 
applied soil pressures as compared to isolated or strip spread footings.  Also, the volume of soil 
displaced by the foundation will result in a lower net applied stress that will limit settlement. 
Mat foundations on cohesive soils (clays) may be controlled by deep-seated bearing capacity.  
The subsurface explorations must be carried to sufficient depth to assess both deep-seated 
bearing capacity and the zone of stress influence (Section 5.3) for settlement computation.  Due 
to the large dimensions of a mat, the zone of influence will be deeper than for isolated or strip 
spread footings. 
A common design approach for mat foundations uses beam on elastic foundation theory to 
compute the soil-structure interaction and deflections.  The reinforcement of the mat can then be 
designed based on the deflections computed within the mat.  The beam on elastic foundation 
approach models the support of foundation soils as a bed of discrete elastic springs (Winkler 
foundation).  The soil reaction at any particular point beneath a mat is: 
qapplied = Kvy (8-1) 
where: qapplied = Applied stress 
 K v = Modulus of subgrade reaction (force/length3) 
 y = Vertical displacement 
 128

The modulus of subgrade reaction can be obtained from Figure 8-3.  Note that the notation for 
the modulus is KV1 in Figure 8-3.  The modulus of subgrade reaction can also be obtained from 
plate load tests but should be corrected for size and shape effects according to Figure 8-4. 
The validity of the beam on elastic foundation approach has been called into question due to the 
fundamental assumption regarding the relative rigidity of the mat as compared to the soil.  Also, 
the modulus of subgrade reaction is not an intrinsic soil property, and is a function not only of 
the stiffness of the soil, but the stiffness, shape and depth of the mat.  Despite these limitations, 
the method is still a practical and commonly used way of computing displacements to design the 
structural reinforcement of the mat. 
 
 129

 
Figure 8-3:  Modulus of Subgrade Reaction (NAVFAC, 1986a) 
 130

 
 
Figure 8-4:  Analysis of Plate Load Test Results (NAVFAC, 1986a) 
 131

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank) 
 
 
 132

CHAPTER 9 
 
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
9.1 DESIGN-BID-BUILD PROCUREMENT 
9.1.1 Plans, Specifications and Estimates 
Plans are typically developed to show footing locations, dimensions and details for steel 
reinforcement, required footing elevations, and the embedment and backfill dimensions.  A 
foundation data sheet is usually provided to show summary subsurface data in spatial relation to 
the foundations.  Material descriptions, ground water levels, SPT data and other subsurface 
investigation information are particularly valuable to the contractor for evaluation of excavation, 
shoring, dewatering and other construction details that are usually left up to the contractor to 
design or select.  The geotechnical report should be made available to contractors. 
The plans should detail the drainage and backfill requirements for abutments and retaining walls.  
For bridges, the abutment area is critical because it performs many functions.  To prevent the 
notorious “bump at the end of the bridge,” the abutment backfill must be properly compacted and 
not prone to material loss due to migration of fine-grained material.  Refer to the Soils and 
Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000) for specific details 
regarding materials that can be specified to promote good compaction of the backfill.  
Underdrain filter material or prefabricated geocomposite drains can be specified to prevent the 
fine-grained soil migration problem.  Drainage details should be provided to prevent build up of 
pore water pressures behind the stemwall. 
Specifications typically include requirements for concrete, steel reinforcement and construction 
procedures.  The FHWA Standard Specifications (FHWA, 1996) include Section 208, “Structure 
Excavation and Backfill for Selected Major Structures,” Section 209, “Structure Excavation and 
Backfill,” Section 552, “Structural Concrete” and Section 554 “Reinforcing Steel.”  Items 
covered by these specifications include material requirements, preparation and compaction of a 
suitable bearing level in soil or rock, temporary cut slopes and shoring, requirements for shop 
drawings, protection of foundation conditions during construction, concrete delivery and 
placement, curing requirements and acceptance requirements. 
The specifications should reference the availability of the geotechnical report.  Special 
provisions might be necessary where special foundation soil/rock treatment or ground water 
control is required.  Soft or liquefiable foundation soils may need special treatment to develop 
firm foundation conditions.  When constructing in tight and sensitive areas, such as next to 
existing structure foundations, special shoring requirements might be necessary. 
 133

Pay items may include Structure Excavation, Foundation Fill, Structural Backfill, Shoring and 
Bracing and Cofferdams.  The actual footings may be considered incidental to structure 
construction.  Alternatively, concrete and steel would be measured and paid for according to unit 
quantities and prices.   
9.1.2 Structural Fills 
Special details and specifications are necessary when constructing a compacted structural fill to 
support a bridge foundation such as an abutment.  Figure 9-1, adapted from Cheney and Chassie 
(2000) shows recommended details for construction of a structural approach embankment.  Note 
the zones of specified materials and compaction requirements.  The materials specifications are 
chosen to provide a material that is capable of being compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition 
that will be suitable for support of a bridge abutment spread footing.  The specification for select 
material recommended in the Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & 
Chassie, 2000) is included in Appendix A.  The specifications used by the Washington, Nevada 
and Michigan state transportation departments for structural fills beneath spread footing 
abutments are also included in Appendix A. 
Select structural fill and highway embankment material should not include unsuitable material.  
The specifications for these materials should prohibit unsuitable or deleterious material such as 
peat, muck, wood, organic waste, coal, charcoal or any other material that would perform poorly 
in an embankment. 
9.2 DESIGN-BUILD PROCUREMENT 
The design-build procurement approach should include owner-provided geotechnical data, to the 
extent sufficient for normal foundation design.  A Geotechnical Data Report (GDR) is 
recommended.  Geotechnical Interpretive Reports and Geotechnical Baseline Reports may also 
be prepared to document the expected surface and subsurface conditions.  These documents will 
help to reduce uncertainty during bidding and reduce the potential for risk contingencies.  The 
GDR should identify any special conditions that might affect structural fill and shallow 
foundation design/construction and should provide the test results for necessary geotechnical 
properties.  Sometimes the alignment and structure locations are not fixed at the time of the 
Design-Build procurement; therefore, the contractor may need to provide supplemental 
explorations and testing. 
Special Provision specifications should include the requirements the contracting agency wants to 
impose on the contractor to achieve the desired foundation performance – for example, codified 
design criteria, tolerable settlement criteria, estimated scour depths, seismic criteria and 
adherence to standard specifications.  A submittal and review process should be prescribed, 
along with a minimum quality control and assurance plan. 
 
 
 134

 
 
 
15 m (50') min
1
1
3 min
1
1.5 m (5')
Select Structural Fill
(Minimum 100% compaction, T99)
Highway Embankment Material, 150 mm (6") Max. Topsize
(Minimum 95% compaction, T180)
Highway Embankment Material
(Minimum 90% compaction, T180)
Place embankment to this line
prior to abutment construction
or pile driving
Working lines drawn perpendicular to projected
centerline of bearing to determine end limit  for
placement of Select Material and Highway
Embankment Material
Backfill abutment to a point 1.5 m
(5') behind the wingwall with
Material per Note 1 to subgrade
1.5 m (5') Pad of Select
Material placed beneath
abutments on spread
footings
Minimum breakpoint of berm
and end slope may be located
0.6 m (2') above the top of the
footing and 1.2 m (4') out from
the front edge
See Note 1
Projection of abutment wingwall
Note 1:  Highway embankment material and select material shall be placed simultaneously of the
             vertical payment line
 
Figure 9-1: Structural Approach Fill Details (after Cheney & Chassie, 2000) 
 
 135

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank) 
 136

CHAPTER 10 
 
INSPECTION AND CONSTRUCTION MONITORING 
Because of the limitations of geotechnical explorations and geologic interpretations, there is 
always the possibility that significant deviations from anticipated subsurface conditions might be 
encountered.  In addition, construction operations can change the behavior of in-place soils, as 
well as the foundation support and stability of nearby facilities.  Therefore, observations by an 
experienced geotechnical engineer during construction are recommended to identify additional 
concerns in the field and to provide adjustments to the design when necessary. 
The contracting agency’s construction personnel normally provide inspection and monitoring.  
The geotechnical report should discuss the anticipated ground conditions at the footing bearing 
level.  In addition, the geotechnical engineer should explain how to identify the expected ground 
conditions to the inspection staff and be sure the inspectors know how to contact the designers if 
any questionable conditions are observed.  Geotechnical staff may need to make site visits to 
observe questionable subsurface conditions and to oversee specialized instrumentation.  
Additional discussion and guidance regarding inspection and monitoring can be found in the 
Guide to Earthwork Construction (TRB, 1990). 
10.1 INSPECTION 
Inspection of foundation construction is only as good as the qualifications and experience of the 
inspector.  Most problems can be avoided by having, in addition to a qualified and cooperative 
contractor, a competent inspector who follows systematic inspection and documentation 
procedures and communicates issues with the foundation designer.  The inspector should be 
aware of conditions that could affect the intended performance of the foundation and structure.  
This can be accomplished by reviewing the plans and specifications, along with the geotechnical 
report, and consulting with the geotechnical engineer.  Foundations are usually designed to: 
• Perform within settlement tolerances, 
• Maintain an adequate safety margin with respect to bearing capacity failure, 
• Provide frictional resistance against sliding, 
• Provide resistance against lateral earth pressures, and 
• Provide sufficient support to prevent slope instability. 
Accepting materials or procedures different from those specified could compromise the design 
intent and potentially lead to distress or failure.  Exceeding a criterion can sometimes lead to 
problems such as over-compaction behind an abutment wall, which could lead to increased 
stresses on the foundation element. 
 137

Ground water impacts can be serious, possibly contributing to the disturbance of in-place soils.  
When dewatering operations may be necessary, they should be mentioned in the construction 
considerations section of the geotechnical report.  Ground water control using sumps will have 
different effects on foundation soils and slopes than the use of dewatering wells.  For instance, 
the stability of temporary sloped excavations may be compromised if water is allowed to seep 
directly from the sidewalls of the excavation for removal from a sump.  In this case dewatering 
wells would locally lower the ground water level and improve the stability of the slopes.  
Conversely, dewatering in a clay soil profile can induce consolidation settlement by the resulting 
increase in vertical effective stress, a condition the geotechnical engineer may not have allowed 
for or considered in the settlement computations.   
Improper construction methods and procedures can potentially lead to foundation and slope 
failures.  The inspector should regularly (e.g., daily) observe foundation and slope conditions for 
potential weaknesses that may need to be observed and addressed by the geotechnical engineer. 
Surface water and precipitation can deteriorate the condition of foundation bearing materials.  If 
the ground conditions expected at the bearing elevation are considered moisture sensitive, the 
geotechnical report should identify this potential and make a recommendation that the bearing 
materials be protected from the effects of surface moisture.  Some rocks and IGMs can also be 
adversely affected by moisture, seepage and relaxation due to excavation. 
The bottoms of footing excavations can be probed with small diameter rods to confirm bearing 
resistance.  More quantitative information can be obtained using cone penetration tests and 
nuclear densometers.  Test pit excavation into and below the bearing stratum should be avoided 
due to the difficulty in compacting the backfill. 
Routine inspection should include checking that procedural requirements are followed, materials 
are provided that meet performance criteria and satisfactory compaction/density test results are 
obtained.  The inspector should review the geotechnical report for special issues that should be 
observed during construction. 
10.2 MATERIALS 
10.2.1 Line, Grade and Bearing Elevation 
The agency inspector should confirm that surveyed locations and elevations of the footing 
elements conform to the plans and shop drawings.  Where foundation elevations and location 
vary from those specified, the actual dimensions should be documented and then checked with 
the designer for concurrence. 
10.2.2 Bearing Stratum 
The in-place bearing stratum of soil or rock should be checked to verify the in situ condition and 
the degree of improvement achieved by the contractor’s preparation approach.  Some soil types 
can become remolded and weakened from disturbance.  If the conditions deviate from those 
anticipated in the geotechnical report and/or the plans and specifications, the geotechnical 
engineer should be consulted to determine if additional measures are necessary. 
 138

10.2.3 Structural Fill Materials 
The fill requirements should be strictly adhered to because the fill must perform within expected 
limits with respect to strength (bearing capacity) and, more importantly, within tolerance for 
differential settlement.  Sometimes the area for construction of the fill is small, such as abutment 
and wingwall backfill, which may necessitate the use of smaller compaction equipment. 
10.3 MONITORING 
When monitoring the construction of structural fills that will support shallow foundations, 
particular attention should be paid to the following: 
• The material should be tested for gradation and durability at sufficient frequency to 
ensure the material placed meets the specification. 
• The specified level of compaction must be obtained in the fill.  Testing, if applicable, 
should be performed in accordance with standard operating procedures and at the 
recommended intervals or number of tests. 
• If a surcharge fill is required for pre-loading, it should be verified that the unit weight of 
the surcharge fill meets the value assumed in design. 
The elevation of constructed foundations should be checked before and after the structural load is 
applied.  This will serve as a baseline for long-term bridge monitoring.  Subsequently, additional 
survey measurements could be made to confirm satisfactory performance or to identify whether 
potentially harmful settlements are occurring.  It may be important to check the completion of fill 
settlements before foundation construction if soft compressible soils exist below (e.g., settlement 
plates, horizontal inclinometers, etc.).  The lateral displacement potential can be greater than the 
vertical movements; therefore, if conditions warrant, monitoring may also include complete 
survey coordinates and possibly more accurate instrumentation. 
Monitoring may also be necessary to evaluate the impact on neighboring ground and facilities.  
Such concerns could be monitored with simple survey tag lines (with benchmark and monitoring 
hubs) and telltales to measure lateral deviations and vertical subsidence/heave.  Higher reliability 
expectations may require more sophisticated instrumentation, such as inclinometers, strain gages, 
extensometers and tiltmeters.  Pre-existing condition surveys of neighboring structures could be 
valuable, particularly in congested urban areas.  
The instrumentation program should be developed considering the anticipated performance, risks 
and potential consequences.  Parameters should be identified that are critical to project success 
and appropriate instrumentation selected.  A key to successful use of instrumentation is to 
measure, plot and interpret the data in a timely manner to be able to take corrective measures, if 
needed. 
 139

 140
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank) 
 

REFERENCES 
AASHTO (1988).  “Manual on Subsurface Investigations,” American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials, Washington, D.C.  
AASHTO (1994).  “LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, 1st Ed.,” American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials, Washington, D.C. 
AASHTO (1996).  “Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, 16th Ed. (with 1997, 1998, 
1999 and 2000 Interim Revisions),” American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials, Washington, D.C. 
AASHTO (1998).  “LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, 2nd Ed. (with 1999, 2000 and 2001 
Interim Revisions),” American Association of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials, Washington, D.C. 
Arman, A., Saintani, N., Castelli, R., and Munfakh, G. (1997).  “Geotechnical and Foundation 
Engineering, Module 1 – Subsurface Investigations,” Publication No. FHWA NHI-97-
021, NHI Course No. 13231, Federal Highway Administration, National Highway 
Institute, Arlington, Virginia.  
Armour, T., Groneck, P., Keeley, J. and Sharma, S. (2000).  “Micropile Design and Construction 
Guidelines Implementation Manual,” Publication No. FHWA-SA-97-070, Federal 
Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
ASCE (1994).  “Settlement Analysis,” Technical Engineering and Design Guides as Adapted 
from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, American Society of Civil Engineers, No. 9. 
Bazaraa, A.R.S. (1967).  “Use of the Standard Penetration Test for Estimating Settlements of 
Shallow Foundations on Sand,” Ph.D. Thesis presented to University of Illinois, Urbana. 
Bieniawski, Z.T. (1984).  Rock Mechanics Design in Mining and Tunneling, A. A. Balkema 
Publishers, Rotterdam. 
Bieniawski, Z.T. (1989).  Engineering Rock Mass Classifications, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York. 
Bishop, A.W. (1955).  “The Use of the Slip Circle in the Stability Analysis of Slopes.”  
Geotechnique, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 7-17. 
Bjerrum, L. and Simons, N.E. (1960).  “Comparison of Shear Strength Characteristics of 
Normally Consolidated Clays,” Proceedings, ASCE Research Conference on Shear 
Strength of Cohesive Soils, pp. 711-726. 
 141

Bowles, J.E. (1982).  Foundation Analysis and Design, 3rd Ed., McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York. 
Briaud, J.-L. (1989).  “The Pressuremeter Test for Highway Applications,” Publication No. 
FHWA-IP-89-008, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C.  
Briaud, J.-L. (1992).  The Pressuremeter, A. A. Balkema Publishers, Brookfield, Vermont. 
Briaud, J.-L. and Gibbens, R. (1994).  “Predicted and Measured Behavior of Five Spread 
Footings on Sand,” ASCE Geotechnical Special Publication No. 41. 
Briaud, J.-L. and Gibbens, R. (1995).  “Large Scale Load Tests and Data Base of Spread 
Footings on Sand,” Publication No. FHWA-RD-95-000, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Briaud, J.-L., Hossain, K., Barfknecht, J. and Lee, J.H. (2000).  “Load Settlement Curve Method 
for Spread Footings on Sand,” Publication No. FHWA-RD-2000-XXX, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Brinch Hansen, J. (1970).  “A Revised and Extended Formula for Bearing Capacity,” Bulletin 
No. 28, Danish Geotechnical Institute, Copenhagen. 
Burland, J.B. and Burbidge, M.C. (1984).  “Settlement of Foundations on Sand and Gravel,” 
Proc. Instn Civil Engrs, Part 1, 78, December, pp. 1325-1381. 
Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual (1992).  3rd  Ed., Canadian Geotechnical Society, 
Technical Committee on Foundations, c/o BiTech Publishers Ltd., Vancouver, B.C. 
Carter, J.P., and Kulhawy, F.H. (1988).  “Analysis and Design of Foundations Socketed into 
Rock,” Report No. EL-5918, Empire State Electric Engineering Research Corporation 
and Electric Power Research Institute, New York, N.Y. 
Caquot, A. and Kerisel, F. (1948).  “Tables for the Calculation of Passive Pressure, Active 
Pressure and Bearing Capacity of Foundations,” Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 
Casagrande, A. (1936).  “The Determination of the Preconsolidation Load and Its Practical 
Significance,” Discussion 34, Proceedings  of the First International Conference on Soil 
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Cambridge, III, pp. 60-64. 
Chen, Wai-Fah and McCarron, W.O. (1991).  “Bearing Capacity of Shallow Foundations,” 
Foundation Engineering Handbook, 2nd Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, pp. 
144-165. 
Cheney, R.S. and Chassie, R.G. (2000).  “Soils and Foundation Workshop Reference Manual,” 
Publication No. FHWA NHI-00-045, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Christian, J.T. and Carrier, W.D. (1978).  “Janbu, Bjerrom and Kjaernsli’s Chart Reinterpreted,” 
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 15. 
 142

Coduto, D.P. (1994).  Foundation Design: Principles and Practices, Prentice Hall, Inc., 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 
D’Appolonia (1989).  “Recommended Specifications for the Design of Foundations, Retaining 
Walls and Substructures,” Report No. NCHRP 12-35, National Cooperative Highway 
Research Program, Transportation Research Board and National Research Council. 
D’Appolonia, D.J., D’Appolonia, E. and Brissette, R.F. (1968).  “Settlement of Spread Footings 
on Sand,” Journal of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, ASCE, Vol. 94 (SM3). 
D’Appolonia, D.J., D’Appolonia, E. and Brissette, R.F. (1970).  “Settlement of Spread Footings 
on Sand,” (closure), Journal of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, ASCE, Vol. 96 
(SM2). 
DiMillio, A.F. (1982).  “Performance of Highway Bridge Abutments Supported by Spread 
Footings on Compacted Fill,” Report No. FHWA/RD-81/184, FHWA, Washington, D.C. 
Fang, Hsai-Yang (1991).  Foundation Engineering Handbook, 2nd Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
New York. 
FHWA (1996).  “Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges on Federal 
Highway Projects,” FP-96. 
Gifford, D.G., Kraemer, S.R., Wheeler, J.R. and McKown, A.F. (1987).  “Spread Footings for 
Highway Bridges,” FHWA Report No. RD-86/185. 
Goodman, R.E. (1989).  Introduction to Rock Mechanics, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, New 
York. 
Hoek, E. and Bray, J.W. (1981).  Rock Slope Engineering, 3rd Ed., The Institution of Mining and 
Metallurgy, London. 
Holtz, R.D. and Kovacs, W.D. (1981).  An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hough, B.K. (1959).  “Compressibilty as the Basis for Soil Bearing Value,” Journal of the Soil 
Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 85, Part 2. 
Hynes-Griffin, M.E. and Franklin, A.G. (1984).  “Rationalizing the Seismic Coefficient 
Method,” Miscellaneous Paper GL-84-13, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways 
Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi. 
Kavazanjian, E., Jr., Matasović, T. Hadj-Hamou and Sabatini, P.J. (1997).  “Geotechnical 
Engineering Circular No. 3, Design Guidance: Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering for 
Highways,” Report No. FHWA-SA-97-076, Federal Highway Administration, 
Washington, D.C. 
 143

Kulhawy, F. H. (1975).  “Stress Deformation Properties of Rock and Rock Discontinuities,” 
Engineering Geology, Vol. 9, pp. 327-350. 
Kulhawy, F. H. (1978).  “Geomechnical Model for Rock Foundation Settlement,” Journal of the 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 4 (GT2), pp. 211-217. 
Kulhawy, F.H. (1983).  “Transmission Line Structure Foundations for Uplift and Compression 
Loading,” Report No. EL-2870, Electric Power Research Institute. 
Kulhawy, F. H. and Carter, J. P. (1992).  Engineering in Rock Masses, Butterworth and 
Heinemann Ltd., Oxford. 
Kulhawy, F. H. and Goodman, R. E. (1987).  “Foundations in Rock,” Ground Engineer’s 
Reference Book, Bell, F.G., Ed., Butterworths, London. 
Lagasse, P.F., Schall, J.D. and Richardson, E.V. (2001a).  “Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 
20 (HEC-20) – Stream Stability at Highway Structures,” 3rd Ed., Report No. FHWA NHI-
01-002, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Lagasse, P.F., Zevenbergen, L.W., Schall, J.D. and Clopper, P.E. (2001b).  “Hydraulic 
Engineering Circular No. 23 (HEC-23) – Bridge Scour and Stream Instability 
Countermeasures, Experience, Selection and Design Guidance,” 2nd Ed., Report No. 
FHWA-NHI-01-003, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Lama, R.D. and Vutukuri, V.S. (1978).  Handbook on Mechanical Properties of Rocks, Trans. 
Tech. Publications, Clausthal, Vol. 2. 
Lambe, T.W. and Whitman, R.V. (1969).  Soil Mechanics, New York, John Wiley & Sons. 
Lee, K. L. and Singh, A. (1971).  “Compaction of Granular Soils,” Proceedings, 9th Engineering 
Geology and Soils Engineering Symposium, Idaho Department of Highways, Boise. 
Liao, S.S.C. and Whitman, R.V. (1986).  “Overburden Correction Factors for SPT in Sand,” 
Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 112, No. 3, pp. 373-377. 
Mast, R., Marsh, L., Spry, C., Johnson, S., Griebenow, R., Guarre, J. and Wilson, W. (1996).  
“Seismic Design of Bridges,” Publication No. FHWA-SA-97-007, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Mayne, P.W. and Kulhawy, F.H. (1982).  “Ko-OCR Relationships in Soil,” Journal of the 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 108, No. GT6, pp. 851-872. 
Meyerhof, G.G. (1957).  “The Ultimate Bearing Capacity of Foundations on Slopes,” 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation 
Engineering, London, Vol. 1, pp. 384-386. 
 144

Moulton, L.K., Ganga Rao, H.V.S. and Halvorsen, G.T. (1982).  “Tolerable Movement Criteria 
for Highway Bridges,” Publication No. FHWA-RD-81-162, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Moulton, L.K., Ganga Rao, H.V.S. and Halvorsen, G.T. (1985).  “Tolerable Movement Criteria 
for Highway Bridges,” Publication No. FHWA-RD-85-107, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Munfakh, G., Arman, A., Collin, J.G., Hung, J.C.-J., and Brouillette, R.P. (2000).  “Shallow 
Foundations Reference Manual,” Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-023, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
NAVFAC (1986a).  “Design Manual 7.1, Soil Mechanics,” U.S. Department of the Navy, Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command, 200 Stovall Street, Alexandria, VA  22332. 
NAVFAC (1986b).  “Design Manual 7.2, Foundations and Earth Structures,” U.S. Department 
of the Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering command, 200 Stovall Street, Alexandria, VA  
22332. 
Newmark, N.M. (1942).  “Influence Charts for Computation of Stresses in Elastic Foundations,” 
University of Illinois Bulletin No. 338. 
Nowak, A.S. (1992).  “Calibration of LRFD Bridge Design Code,” NCHRP Report No. 12-33, 
prepared for the National Cooperative Highway Research Program by Department of 
Civil Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. 
O’Neill, M.W., Townsend, F.C., Hassan, K.M., Buller, A. and Chan, P.S. (1996).  “Load 
Transfer for Drilled Shafts in Intermediate Geomaterials,” Publication No. FHWA-RD-
95-172, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
O’Neill, M.W. and Reese, L.C. (1999).  “Drilled Shafts: Construction Procedures and Design 
Methods,” Publication No. FHWA-IF-99-025, Federal Highway Administration, 
Washington, D.C. 
Oweis, I.S. (1979).  “Equivalent Linear Model for Predicting Settlements of Sand Bases,” 
Journal of Geotechnical Division, ASCE, December. 
Peck, R.B. (1969).  “Advantages and Limitations of the Observational Method in Applied Soil 
Mechanics,” Geotechnique, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 171-187.  Reprinted in Judgment in 
Geotechnical Engineering: The Professional Legacy of Ralph B. Peck (1984), J. 
Dunnicliff and D.U. Deere (Eds.), Wiley, New York, pp. 122-127. 
Peck, R.B. and Bazaraa, A.R.S. (1969).  “Discussion of ‘Settlement of Spread Footings on 
Sand,’ by D’Appolonia, D’Appolonia and Brissette,” Journal of Soil Mechanics and 
Foundation Engineering, ASCE, 96 (SM3), 905-909. 
Peck, R.B., Hanson, W.E. and Thornburn, T.H. (1974).  Foundation Engineering, 2nd Ed., John 
Wiley & Sons. 
 145

Perloff, W.H. (1975).  “Pressure Distribution and Settlement,” Chapter 4, Foundation 
Engineering Handbook, H.F. Winterkorn and H.T. Fang, Eds., Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company, New York, pp. 148-196. 
Poulos, H.G. and Davis E.H. (1974).  Elastic Solutions for Soil and Rock Mechanics, New York, 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Prandtl, L. (1920).  “Uber die Harte Platischer Korper,” Nach. Gesell. Wiss. Gottingen. Math-
Phys. KI. pp. 74-85. 
Reissner, H. (1924).  “Zum erddruckproblem,” Proc. First Intem. Congress of Applied 
Mechanics,” Delft, pp. 295-311. 
Riaund, J.-L., and Miran, J. (1992).  “The Cone Penetrometer Test,” Report No. FHWA-SA-91-
043, Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, 
D.C. 
Riaund, J.-L., and Miran, J. (1992).  “The Flat Dilatometer Test,” Report No. FHWA-SA-91-044, 
Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C. 
Richardson, E.V. and Davis, S.R. (1995).  “Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 18 (HEC-18) –  
Evaluating Scour at Bridges,” 3rd Ed.,” Publication No. FHWA-IP-90-017, Federal 
Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Sabatini, P.J., Pass, D.G., and Bachus, R.C. (1999).  “Geotechnical Engineering Circular No. 4 – 
Ground Anchors and Anchored Systems,” Publication No. FHWA-SA-99-015, Federal 
Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Schmertmann, J.H. (1970).  “Static Cone to Compute Static Settlement Over Sand,” Journal of 
Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering (ASCE), 96 (SM3), pp. 1011-1043. 
SHB AGRA (1993).  “Report: Geotechnical Investigation, Mount Rose Interchange (NDOT 
Porject 1-1949), Washoe County, Nevada,” SHB AGRA, Inc., Sparks, NV. 
Skempton, A.W. (1948).  “Vane Tests in the Alluvial Plain of the River Forth Near 
Grangemouth,” Geotechnique, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 111-124. 
Spencer, E. (1967).  “A Method of Analysis of the Stability of Embankments Assuming Parallel 
Interface Forces,” Geotechnique, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp 11-26. 
Terzaghi, K. and Peck, R. (1948).  Soil Mechanics in Engineering, 1st Ed., John Wiley & Sons. 
Terzaghi, K. and Peck, R. (1967).  Soil Mechanics in Engineering, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons. 
TRB (1990).  “Guide to Earthwork Construction,” State of the Art Report 8, Transportation 
Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C. 
 146

TRB (1996).  “Landslides: Investigation and Mitigation,” Special Report No. 247, Transportation 
Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C. 
Tschebotarioff, G.P. (1951).  Soil Mechanics, Foundations and Earth Structures, McGraw-Hill, 
New York. 
Urzua, A. (1993).  “EMBANK: A Microcomputer Program to Determine One-Dimensional 
Compression Settlement Due to Embankment Loads,” Publication No. FHWA-SA-92-
045, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
US Army Corps of Engineers (1988).  “Arctic and Subarctic Construction: Calculation Methods 
for Determination of Depths of Freeze and Thaw in Soils,” Technical Manual TM5-852-
6. 
Vesic, A.S. (1975).  “Bearing Capacity of Shallow Foundations,” Foundation Engineering 
Handbook, 2nd Ed., H.F. Winterkorn and H.T. Fang, Eds., Chapter 3, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Company, New York, pp. 121-147. 
Wahls, H. (1983).  “Shallow Foundations for Highway Structures,” NCHRP Synthesis of 
Highway Practice 107, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 
Washington, D.C. 
Winterkorn, H.F. and Fang, H.-Y. (1975).  Foundation Engineering Handbook, 2nd Ed., Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York. 
Withiam, J.L. et al. (1998).  “Load and Resistance Factor Design (LFRD) of Highway Bridge 
Structures,” Report No. FHWA HI-98-032, NHI Course No. 13068, Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Wyllie, D. and Mah, C.W. (1998).  “Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering, Module 5 – 
Rock Slopes Reference Manual,” Publication No. FHWA NHI99-007, NHI Course No. 
13234, Federal Highway Administration, National Highway Institute, Arlington, 
Virginia. 
Youd, T.L., et al. (2001).  “Liquefaction Resistance of Soils: Summary Report from the 1996 
NCEER and 1998 NCEER/NSF Workshops on Evaluation of the Liquefaction Resistance 
of Soils,” Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironemental Engineering (ASCE), Vol. 
127, No. 10, pp. 817-833. 
 147

 148
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank) 
 
 

APPENDIX A 
 
STRUCTURAL FILL MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
FHWA SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS REFERENCE MANUAL 
The following specification for select material is recommended in the Soils and Foundations 
Workshop Reference Manual (Cheney & Chassie, 2000).  This specification should be used in 
conjunction with the suggested plan detail, Figure 9-1. 
SELECT MATERIAL 
Description This work shall consist of excavation, disposal, placement and compaction of all 
materials that are not provided for under another section of these specifications and shall be 
executed in conformance with payment lines, grades, thicknesses and typical sections specific in 
the contract documents.   
Materials – Tests and Control Methods Materials tests and control methods pertaining to the item 
requirements and work of this section will be performed in conformance with the procedures 
used by the Department. 
Materials furnished under these items shall conform to the following requirements: 
1. Gradation.  The material shall have the following gradation: 
Sieve Size Percent Passing (by weight) 
100 mm 100 
No. 40 0 to 70 
No. 200 0 to 15 
2. Soundness.  The material shall be substantially free of shale or other soft, poor-durability 
particles.  Where the State elects to test for this requirement, a material with a magnesium 
sulfate soundness loss exceeding 30 percent shall be rejected. 
Construction The type of material to be used in filling and backfill at the structures, and payment 
lines, therefore, shall be in conformance with the details shown on the appropriate Standard 
Sheet or as noted on the plans or as ordered by the engineer. 
Fill or backfill material at structures, culverts and pipes shall be deposited in horizontal layers 
not exceeding 150 mm in thickness prior to compaction.  Compaction of each layer shall be as 
specified.  A minimum of 100 percent of standard proctor maximum density will be required.  
When filling behind abutments and similar structures, all material shall be placed and compacted 
in front of the walls prior to placing fill behind the walls to a higher elevation.  The limits to 
A - 1 

which this subsection will apply shall be in accordance with the Standard Sheets or as modified 
by the plans. 
Measurement Quantities for this work shall be computed in cubic meters in the final compacted 
position.  A deduction shall be made for pipes (based on nominal diameters) and other payment 
items when the combined cross-sectional area exceeds one 0.1 m2 unless shown otherwise on the 
plans.  No deduction will be made for the cross-sectional area of an existing facility. 
Basis of Payment The unit price bid for all pay items of work encompassed by this section shall 
include the costs of furnishing all equipment, labor, and materials as necessary to complete the 
work of the item, except where specific costs are designated or included in another pay item of 
work.  All incidental costs, such as acquisition of borrow pits or material outside of the right-of-
way, rock drilling and blasting, compaction and special test requirements, stockpiling and re-
handling of materials – precautionary measures to protect private property and utilities and to 
form and trim graded surfaces – shall be included in the unit price of the pay item where such 
costs are incurred. 
 
WASHINGTON STATE DOT GRAVEL BORROW SPECIFICATION 
The Washington State DOT uses the following materials specifications for embankments that 
will support bridge foundations: 
Gravel Borrow 
Aggregate for gravel borrow shall consist of granular material, either naturally occurring or 
processed, and shall meet the following requirements for grading and quality: 
Sieve Size Percent Passing 
100 mm (4″) 100 
50 mm (2″) 75 – 100 
4.75 mm (#4) 50 – 80 
0.425 mm (#40) 30 max. 
0.075 mm (#200) 7.0 max. 
Sand equivalent 42 min. 
Method “C” compaction required (minimum of 95 percent maximum density according to 
AASHTO T-99 or WSDOT Test Method 606).  Lift thickness limited to 200 mm (100 mm in top 
0.6 m). 
 
Note: WSDOT usually specifies Gravel Borrow for the entire embankment below the footing. 
 
 
A - 2 

NEVADA DOT STRUCTURAL FILL SPECIFICATION 
The following specification was used for the Mt. Rose Highway Interchange Project (Nevada 
DOT) described in Section 2.7.2: 
 
Materials for the Structural Fill Under the Footings 
Type 1 Class B Aggregate Base 
Sieve Analysis: 
Sieve Size Percent Passing 
37.5 mm 100 
25 mm 80 – 100 
4.75 mm 30 – 65 
1.18 mm 15 – 40 
75 µm 2 – 12 
R-value: 70 Min. 
Percentage of Wear (500 Rev.): 45% Max. 
Liquid Limit: 35 Max. 
Plasticity Index: 
Percent Finer than 75 µm PI 
0.1 – 3.0 15 max 
3.1 – 4.0 12 max 
4.1 – 5.0 9 max 
5.1 – 8.0 6 max 
8.1 – 11.0 4 max 
11.1 – 15.0 3 max 
Fractured Faces:  15% Min. 
Placement 
Place in layers not exceeding 200 mm in thickness before compaction. 
Compaction 
Compact to not less than 95% of the maximum density as determined by Test Method No. Nev. 
T101.  (Note:  T101 is based on the use of the Harvard Miniature Compaction Device.) 
A - 3 

A - 4 
MICHIGAN DOT STRUCTURAL FILL SPECIFICATION 
The following specification was used for the Cadillac Bypass Project, Structure S01 
(Michigan DOT) described in Section 2.7.3: 
Materials for the Structural Fill Under the Footings 
The material under the footings is specified as Structure Embankment.  The structure 
embankment shall be constructed of Granular Material Class III. 
Granular Material Class III 
Sieve Analysis: 
Sieve Size Percent Passing 
150 mm 100 
75 mm 95 – 100 
Loss by Washing:  0 – 15 percent 
Placement 
Granular materials, for backfill, shall be deposited and spread in layers not more than 250 mm in 
thickness. 
Compaction 
The compaction required will be 100 percent of its Maximum Unit Weight. (Note: According to 
Greg Perry of MDOT, the Maximum Unit Weight is determined by the Modified Proctor 
Method.) 
 

APPENDIX B 
 
DESIGN EXAMPLES 
INTRODUCTION 
This appendix provides worked design examples for bridge foundation support on shallow 
foundations in several applications using Service Load Design (SLD) methodology.  The 
applications and design considerations for each are discussed briefly below.  The examples 
follow the design process outlined in Table 6-1 and shown in the flow chart in Figure 6-1. 
It should be noted that these examples are intended to convey one approach and process 
that can lead to a satisfactory design of bridge support on a shallow foundation.  The 
examples should not be construed as representations of the only approach that can lead to a 
satisfactory design.  Also note that the examples only check one or, at most, a few specific 
load cases.  In practice, every complete design should consider all applicable load cases. 
EXAMPLE 1: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON A SPREAD FOOTING FOUNDED IN NATIVE SOIL 
This example uses SLD Group I loads from service load design of an interior bridge column.  
The purpose of the example is to show how bearing capacity and settlement are considered 
together to calculate an allowable bearing capacity that controls the design of the footing. 
EXAMPLE 2: INTEGRAL STUB ABUTMENT ON COMPACTED STRUCTURAL FILL 
This example shows the successful and cost-effective application of a spread footing at a 
structurally integral abutment supported in a compacted structural fill over good foundation 
conditions.  Since integral abutments are most frequently supported on pile foundations, this 
example was developed to illustrate the feasibility of using a spread footing in lieu of piles in 
order to realize the cost savings potential of shallow foundations.  The load case is SLD Group I. 
EXAMPLE 3: STUB SEAT-TYPE ABUTMENT FOOTING IN COMPACTED STRUCTURAL FILL 
This example uses SLD Group IV loads to show the effect of shear loads transmitted through the 
bearing pads due to temperature and shrinkage, etc., at a seat-type abutment with a joint.  The 
example also shows the effective use of engineered embankment design and stage construction 
to permit the use of a spread footing supported in an approach fill over embankment foundation 
conditions that are less than excellent. 
 
 
B - 1 

EXAMPLE 4: FULL-HEIGHT SEAT ABUTMENT FOUNDED IN NATIVE SOIL 
This example shows the design of a tall abutment founded on a spread footing in good ground 
conditions.  The load case is SLD Group I.  The example also shows design of a concrete 
cantilever retaining wall, since the intermediate construction stage of a backfilled stem without 
superstructure loads is also checked. 
EXAMPLE 5: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON A SPREAD FOOTING ON NATIVE ROCK 
This example uses excellent foundation conditions and Group VII seismic loads to show an 
example of foundation design governed by considerations other than bearing capacity or 
settlement. 
 
Note: Unless cited with a specific reference (e.g., AASHTO, 1996), the equation numbers in the 
examples refer to those in the main body of this Circular.
B - 2 

EXAMPLE 1: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON SPREAD FOOTING 
Given: 
• Subsurface profile at the interior bridge pier is shown in Figure B1-1. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 38 mm (1.5 in). 
• The sign conventions and loading directions are shown in Figure B1-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on AASHTO Service Load Design, Group I loads (allowable stress 
design method) considering both the settlement and bearing capacity.  Check for 
overturning and sliding. 
Boring B-1
?
Unit 1:
Lean Clay
Unit 2:
Silty Sand
Unit 3a:
Well-graded Sand
Unit 3b:
Well-graded Sand
(saturated)
Unit 4:
Clean, uniform Sand
6
7
18
20
22
42
38
47
33
45
42
37
49
Column Diameter,
D = 0.6 m
SPT N-value
g =19.6 kN/m3
2.3 m
2.1 m
4.7 m
3.0 m
3.0 m
g =19.6 kN/m3
g =19.6 kN/m3
g =19.6 kN/m3
 
Figure B1-1:  Subsurface Profile 
B - 3 

 
Area of Column, Acol
Lf
Bf
Df
Z - Transverse
Direction of Bridge
Y - Longitudinal
Direction of Bridge
P
Mz - Moment About
Z-Axis due to
Longitudinal Loading
My - Moment About
Y-Axis due to
Transverse Loading
Soil
Footing
 
Figure B1-2: Sign Conventions and Loading Directions 
Solution: 
The solution can be obtained by following the step-by-step process shown in Figure 6-1, Design 
Process Flow Chart. 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:  
The structural, hydraulics and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required 
design information is provided in the problem-given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
The structural engineer has calculated and provided the values shown in Table B1-1. 
 
 
 
B - 4 

TABLE B1-1: LOADS AT COLUMN BASE 
 
Load 
Axial, P 
(kN) 
Shear, V 
(kN) 
Moment, MZ 
(kN-m) 
Moment, MY 
(kN-m) 
Dead load (D) 6400 167 211 748 
Live load (L) 1670 42 409 196.5 
Impact (I) 315 8 77 37 
Wind on structure 
(W) 
884 49 89 226 
Wind on live load 
(WL) 
18 4 7 26 
Earthquake (EQ) 1671 804 1675 5546 
 
Service Load Design Loads for Group I: 
The general equation is: 
 )( β+β+β + )+( β + )(β[ γ= B)E()CF(ILD P BECLDI  (AASHTO, 1996, 
)TSR()LF()WL()W()SF( RLWLWS ++β+β+β+ β+β +   Eqn. 3-10) 
)]ICE()EQ( ICEEQ β+β+  
where: γ  = Load factor (always equal to 1.0 for SLD) 
  = Coefficient for particular load, i, as found in Table 3.22.1A of AASHTO (1996). iβ
Recall from Table 6-2, that SLD Group I is the load combination for normal vehicles using the 
bridge without wind, and that earthquake loads are only considered in Load Group VII.  
Therefore the coefficients for W, WL and EQ are all zero and the general load equation reduces 
to the following for this example: 
] )+( β + )(β[ γ= ILD P LDI  
The AASHTO provisions permit neglecting the impact load, I, for foundations and buried 
structures.  Also, since the footing is relatively shallow, assume that the effect of footing self-
weight is negligible.  The factored loads are as follows: 
Axial Loads: 
kN
kNkN
LDI
8070
16706400
LD P
 =
] )( 1.0 + )( [1.0 1.0 =
] )( β + )(β[ γ=
 
 
B - 5 

Shear: 
kN
kNkN
LD
209
] )(42 1.0  )(167 [1.0 1.0 
)]L()D([   V
=
+=
β+βγ=
 
Moment in the Z direction: 
m-kN
m-kNm-kN
LDZ
620 
] )(409 1.0  ) (211 [1.0 1.0 
)]L()D([   M
=
+=
β+βγ=
 
Moment in the Y direction: 
m-kN
m-kNm-kN
LDY
944.5 
] )(196.5 1.0  ) (748 [1.0 1.0 
)]IL()D([   M
=
+=
+β+βγ=
 
Step 6 – Subsurface Exploration and Laboratory Testing:  
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in Figure B1-1.  Laboratory testing was 
limited to soil classifications and moisture content due to the granular nature of the soils 
encountered in the boring.  The foundation design will be based largely on design parameters 
correlated to the soil classifications and the field SPT N-values.  Apply judgment and recognize 
that it is minimal excavation to remove all of the medium stiff Unit 1 lean clay to avoid any 
associated low strength or compressibility problems in this material.  Therefore, select depth of 
footing, Df, of 2.3 m to bear below Unit 1.  Compute the initial vertical effective stresses at the 
midpoint of each soil layer below the footing: 
Layer 2: 
kPa7.65)6.19(m35.3' 3m
kN
2vo ==σ  
Layer 3a: 
kPa132)6.19(m75.6' 3m
kN
a3vo ==σ  
Layer 3b: 
kPa193)8.9(m5.1)6.19(m6.10' 3m
kN
3m
kN
b3vo =−=σ  
B - 6 

Layer 4: 
kPa222)8.9(m5.4)6.19(m6.13' 3m
kN
3m
kN
4vo =−=σ  
The effective stress diagram for the profile at the pier location is plotted in Figure B1-3. 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
Depth ( m)
100 20003 00 400
u
Vertical Stress (kPa)
132
65.7
267
208193
222
Un it 1
Un it 2
Un it 3a
Un it 4
Un it 3b
σ Voσ 'Vo
 
Figure B1-3:  Effective Stress Diagram 
Step 7 – Calculate allowable bearing capacity:   
The geotechnical engineer will calculate the allowable bearing capacity, considering both the 
potential for bearing capacity failure (Section 5.1) and settlement (Section 5.2). 
Calculate ultimate bearing capacity: 
The general equation for bearing capacity is: 
 bsCNB5.0dbsCqN bscNq WfqqqWqcccult q γγγ γγ++=  (Eqn. 5-14) 
B - 7 

The first term goes to zero since the foundation materials are granular and cohesionless, so the 
cohesion term, c, is zero. 
For the interior pier, we will assume that the footing is essentially rectangular (L/B < 5). Recall 
that the shape and inclination factors should not be applied together (see discussion in Section 
5.2).  Since the effect of the shape factors is significant for rectangular footings, and the 
inclination resulting from the relatively small shear load component (V) is small, we will only 
apply the shape factors as follows: 
6.0s
L
B4.01s
f
f
=
−=
γ
γ  
Assume the effect of eccentricity is small for 
now, so ff LB ≅  
(Table 5-2) 
A design friction angle associated with Layer 2 is needed to calculate sq.  The geotechnical 
engineer has recommended that the footing be cast against the firm, undisturbed soil of Unit 2.  
Unit 2 is 2.1-m thick and overlies denser material at depth, so the properties of Unit 2 will 
govern the footing design.  From Figure B1-1, the average uncorrected field SPT N-value for this 
layer is 20.  From Figure B1-3, the average vertical effective stress in Layer 2 is 65.7 kPa (about 
1.4 ksf).  Entering Figure 4-1 with a blowcount of 20 and a vertical effective stress of 1.4 ksf, a 
relative density, DR, of about 75 percent is read.  Entering Figure 4-2 with this relative density 
for silty sand (Unified Soil Classification ‘SM’), a friction angle of 35 is selected for computing 
bearing capacity.   
7.1s
)35tan(1
11s
tanL
B1s
q
o
q
f
fq
=
+=
φ+=
 
 (Table 5-2) 
Since the overburden materials above the footing are cohesive soils, the correction factor to 
account for shearing resistance of the material above the bearing elevation, dq, should be set 
equal to 1.0: 
0.1dq =  (Table 5-4) 
Since this footing will be level, there is no effect of inclination of the base, so: 
0.1bb q ==γ  (Table 5-5) 
Calculate the effect of the footing embedment, q.  Apply judgment and recognize that it is 
minimal excavation to remove all of the Unit 1 medium stiff lean clay and avoid any associated 
low strength or compressibility characteristics in this material.  Therefore select Df = 2.3 m to 
bear below Unit 1: 
B - 8 

In this case q is only a function of the depth of bearing. 
fov D''q γ=σ=  where: 3m
6.19'= kN
bulk =γγ  
() m3.2)6.19(q 3m
kN=  
kPa1.45q =  
Check ground water effect: 
Depth of ground water table below the bearing depth: 
Df = Depth of footing = 2.3 m Assumes a 0.9-m thick footing and 1.4-m cover 
Dw = Depth of ground water below the ground surface (Df ) = 9.1 m 
Conservatively estimate the footing width with an upper bound value of Bf = 6 m. 
Calculate ground water correction factors, CWγ and CWq: 
0.1DB5.1
D5.05.0C
ff
W
W ≤





++=γ   (Eqn. 5-10) 
9.03.2)6(5.1
1.95.05.0CW =





++=γ   
0.1D
D5.05.0C
f
W
qW ≤




+=   (Eqn. 5-11) 
48.23.2
1.95.05.0C qW =



+=  ;  Use CWq = 1.0 
From Table 5-1, the bearing capacity factors, Nγ and Nq, are 48.0 and 33.3, respectively, for a 
friction angle of 35 degrees in Layer 2. 
So the equation for bearing capacity is: 
fult
fult
WfqqqWqult
B254kPa2553q
0)9)(0.6)(1.)(48.0)(0.)(B (19.6 0.5)(1.0))(1.7)(1.0(33.3)(1.0 kPa 45.1 = q
 bsCNB5.0dbsCqN q
3m
kN
q
+=
+
γ+= γγγ γ
 
B - 9 

Incorporating a factor of safety of 3.0: 
kPaB85851q
0.3)B254kPa2553(q
0.3qq
fall
fall
ultall
+=
÷+=
÷=
 
Estimate Footing Settlement 
Calculate stress increase at the midpoint of each soil layer using the 2-on-1 stress distribution 
method for various footing widths – say, Bf = 3, 4.6 and 6.1 m: 
)ZL)(ZB(
)L)(B(
q ff
ffV
++=σ∆  (Figure 5-12) 
2
f
2
fV
ff
)ZB/(Bq
:so,LBbut
+=σ∆
≅
 
Layer 2 with midpoint of layer @ Z = 1.05 m below base of footing: 
55.0)05.13/(3q
222V =+=σ∆  
Layer 3a with midpoint of layer @ Z = 4.45 m below base of footing: 
16.0)45.43/(3q
22a3V =+=σ∆  
Layer 3b with midpoint of layer @ Z = 8.3 m below base of footing: 
07.0)3.83/(3q
22b3V =+=σ∆  
Layer 4 with midpoint of layer @ Z = 11.3 m below base of footing: 
04.0)3.113/(3q
224V =+=σ∆  
Perform similar calculations for Bf = 4.6 m and Bf = 6.1 m and tabulate: 
B - 10 

TABLE B1-2: STRESS INCREASE WITH DEPTH 
AS FUNCTION OF FOOTING WIDTH 
Stress Increase, ∆σv 
Soil Layer 
Depth 
Range (m) Bf = 3 m Bf = 4.6 m Bf = 6.1 m 
2 2.3 – 4.4 0.55q 0.66q 0.73q 
3a 4.4 – 9.1 0.16q 0.26q 0.33q 
3b 9.1 – 12.1 0.07q 0.13q 0.18q 
4 12.1 – 15.1 0.04q 0.08q 0.12q 
Determine stress applied by footing to generate 38 mm of settlement for same range of footing 
widths, Bf = 3, 4.6 and 6.1 m, using the Hough method: 
General equation: 






σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
vo
vvo
o
flogC
1HH  (Eqn. 5-24) 
Correct SPT blowcounts to account for overburden pressure, N′, for each layer, and enter Figure 
5-19 to obtain bearing capacity factor, C′: 
Layer 2: 
Navg = 20 
N′/N = 1.2  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 24 
C′ = 65   (from Figure 5-19 for silty Sand) 
Layer 3a: 
Navg = 40 
N′/N = 0.9  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 36 
C′ = 120  (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded Sand and Gravel) 
Layer 3b: 
Navg = 43 
N′/N = 0.7  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 30 
C′ = 102  (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded Sand and Gravel) 
Layer 4: 
Navg = 40 
N′/N = 0.66  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 26 
C′ =110  (from Figure 5-19 for clean, uniform Sand) 
B - 11 

Calculate settlement in each layer and sum the settlements to obtain the total settlement for a 
range of applied stresses and footing widths.  Select applied stresses of q = 240 kPa, 290 kPa, 
335 kPa and 380 kPa (corresponding to about 3, 4, 5 and 6 ksf) and nominal footing widths of 3, 
4.6 and 6.1 m: 
Layer 2 (Bf = 3 m): 
mm15m015.0H
)]kPa7.65/))kPa240(55.0kPa7.65log[()65/1(m1.2H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
2
2
vvv22 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm4m004.0H
)]kPa132/))kPa240(16.0kPa132log[()120/1(m7.4H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
a3
a3
ovvova3a3
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm1m001.0H
)]kPa193/))kPa240(07.0kPa193log[()102/1(m0.3H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
b3
b3
vvv3b3 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm1m0005.0H
)]kPa222/))kPa240(04.0kPa222log[()110/1(m3H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
4
4
vvv44 oo
≅=∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm21mm1mm1mm4mm15Hi =+++=∆∑  
Repeat and tabulate for various footing widths and applied stresses (a spreadsheet or computer 
tool can make these calculations rapidly): 
TABLE B1-3: SETTLEMENT AS A FUNCTION OF 
APPLIED STRESS AND FOOTING WIDTH 
Settlement (mm) Applied Stress 
(kPa) Bf = 3 m Bf = 4.6 m Bf = 6.1 m 
240 21 28 31 
290 25 31 35 
335 28 34 38 
380 30 37 41 
 
 
 
B - 12 

Compare to allowable bearing capacities at same footing widths relative to shear failure, 
remembering that the maximum tolerable settlement is 38 mm: 
For Bf = 3 m: 
kPa1106kPa)m3(85851qall =+=   >> 380 kPa (with 30 mm settlement) 
For Bf = 4.6 m: 
kPa1242kPa)m6.4(85851qall =+=   >> 335 kPa (with 34 mm settlement) 
For Bf = 6.1 m: 
kPa1369kPa)m1.6(85851qall =+=   >> 290 kPa (with 35 mm settlement) 
Settlement will therefore limit the allowable bearing capacity for the design of this footing.  
Interpolating the values in Table B1-3, find ranges of footing widths that will limit settlement to 
38 mm or less at allowable bearing capacities of 335 kPa and 380 kPa as shown in Table B1-4. 
TABLE B1-4: SETTLEMENT-LIMITED ALLOWABLE  
BEARING CAPACITIES 
Allowable Bearing Capacity 
(kPa) 
Range of Footing Widths That Will 
Limit Settlement to < 38 mm 
380 < 5.0 m 
335 5.0 to 6.1 m 
 
The geotechnical engineer should provide this table to the structural designer for sizing of the 
footing. 
Step 8 – Calculate sliding and passive soil resistance: 
The footing will bear in the Unit 2 soils.  The friction angle, φ, of 35 degrees selected in Step 7 
will be used to compute sliding resistance. 
The general equation for sliding resistance on cohesionless soils is: 
FR = (W + Pv) tan δ (Eqn. 5-38) 
The second term goes to zero since we are founding the footing on a cohesionless soil unit.  For a 
concrete footing cast against the ground, δ = φ, so the ultimate sliding resistance is: 
)PW(7.035tan)PW(F vvR +=°+=  
 
B - 13 

Since the sliding resistance will develop at strain levels much lower than those needed to develop 
passive pressures against the side of the footing, passive pressure will be ignored unless it is 
found that sliding resistance governs the design of the footing.  The geotechnical engineer should 
provide this equation and the assumptions regarding use of passive pressures to the structural 
engineer for checking the footing’s resistance to sliding. 
Step 9 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The geotechnical engineer has determined that since this is an interior pier with level ground 
conditions, global stability is not a concern. 
Step 10 – Size the footing: 
The structural designer should make a preliminary estimate of the size of the footing by dividing 
the Group I axial load by the largest allowable bearing pressure from Table B1-4: 
m6.4ALB
m2.21kPa3808070A
qPA
ff
2kN
allI
≅==
=÷=
÷=
 
Then calculate eccentricity and effective footing dimensions: 
yff e2BB −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m45.4)m077.0(2m6.4B
m077.08070620e
PMe
f
kNmkN
y
Zy
=−=′
=÷=
÷=
−  
zff e2LL −=′  (Eqn. 6-7) 
m37.4)m117.0(2m6.4L
m117.080705.944e
PMe
f
kmkN
z
Yz
=−=′
=÷=
÷=
−  
2
ff m4.19)m37.4)(m45.4(LBA ==′⋅′=′  
Check allowable bearing stress for effective footing area: 
kPa416m4.198070APq 2kN
applied =÷=′÷=  
This is greater than qall = 380 kPa for footings less than 5.0 m wide, according to Table B1-4, in 
order to limit settlement to less than 38 mm.  Therefore the footing should be sized larger. 
 
B - 14 

Try a 4.9 m-by-4.9 m footing.  Calculate eccentricity and effective footing dimensions: 
yff e2BB −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m75.4)m077.0(2m9.4B
m077.08070620e
PMe
f
kNmkN
y
Zy
=−=′
=÷=
÷=
−  
zff e2LL −=′  (Eqn. 6-7) 
m67.4)m117.0(2m9.4L
m117.080705.944e
PMe
f
kmkN
z
Yz
=−=′
=÷=
÷=
−  
2
ff m2.22)m67.4)(m75.4(LBA ==′⋅′=′  
Check allowable bearing stress for effective footing area: 
kPa364m2.228070APq 2kN
applied =÷=′÷=  
This is less than qall = 380 kPa for footings less than 5.0 m wide, according to Table B1-4, in 
order to limit settlement to less than 38 mm. 
The design is acceptable for bearing capacity and settlement considerations. 
Step 11 – Check overturning (eccentricity) and sliding: 
Overturning will be acceptable if eccentricity in any direction is less than one-sixth the footing 
dimension in that direction. 
077.0eem82.0)m9.4(6
1L6
1B6
1
yzff =>>===   (OK) 
A minimum factor of safety of 1.5 should be provided against sliding: 
V
)PW(7.0
F
FFS V
sliding
R +==   (FR from Step 8) 
V
)PW(7.0FS V+=  
Calculate the weight of cover over the footing and the weight of footing: 
The footing is bearing 2.3 m below grade.  The footing can be assumed to be 0.9 m thick. 
B - 15 

The area of the column is: 
22
col m28.0)m6.0(4A =π=  
The weight of the footing and the soil cover is then (assume unit weight of concrete, γconc, 
of 23.5 kN/m3): 
kN
colercov
kN
ftg
651)6.19)](m4.1(A)m9.4)(m9.4)(m4.1[(W
508)5.23)(m9.4)(m9.4)(m9.0(W
3m
kN
3m
kN
=−=
==
 
kNkNkN
ercovftg 1159651508WWW =+=+=  
So: 
5.131
209
)80701159(7.0FS kN
kNkN
>=+=  (OK) 
Step 12 – Complete structural design of footing:  
The structural engineer completes this step. 
 
B - 16 

EXAMPLE 2: INTEGRAL BRIDGE ABUTMENT ON STRUCTURAL FILL 
Given: 
• An integral abutment on a spread footing is proposed for a bridge. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• The footing length is L = 25.0 m (82 ft); other abutment dimensions are shown in Figure 
B2-1. 
• The approach embankment and the foundation soils are shown in Figure B2-1. 
• The SPT hammer energy ratio is assumed to be ER = 60%. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 25 mm (1 in). 
• Abutment symbols are shown in Figure B2-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Service Load Design, Group I loads (allowable stress design 
method), considering both the settlement and bearing capacity.  Check for overturning 
and sliding. 
 
Hard BASALT
Well-graded clean  SAND
6.0 m
SPT  N-v alue
19
24
27
25
33
37
37
41
RQD = 80%
5.24 m
2
1
0.46 m 0.91 m
1.22 m
2.0 m
0.51 m
B1 .5 B
Structural fill (Well-graded silty  SAND & GRAVEL)
N  =  Uncorrected SPT Blowcount
4.57 m Existing Ground
Surf ace
Key
Boring B-1
 φ =  38 deg  (assumed, N' = 32)
 γ =  20.5 kN/m 3
 φ =  friction angle
N'  =  Corrected SPT Blowcount
 γ =  18.6 kN/m 3
 γsat =  19.6 kN/m 3
 
Figure B2-1: Approach Embankment and Foundation Soils 
B - 17 

 
Pg
H/3
0.5 H
Wh
Wf
Wtoe
Vg
At-rest
Earth  Pressure,  po
Live  Load
Surcharge,  pLS
PO
PLS
Toe
M toe
Wstem
Mg
Footing
Habut
Bf
Tf
Dtoe
Tstem
Superstructure
Backfill
ToeHeel
Tg
 
Figure B2-2: Integral Abutment Symbols 
B - 18 

Solution: 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:   
The structural, hydraulic and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required design 
information is provided in the problem-given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
The superstructure loads are transmitted to the abutment at the girder-stem connection as shown 
in Figure B2-2.  The sense of the shear force is positive if it is in the direction from the toe to the 
heel (right to left) and negative if opposite.  The sense of the moment of the couple is positive for 
resisting moments (counterclockwise) and negative for overturning moments (clockwise).  
Moments of these loads are taken about the toe of the footing.  Their sense is determined in the 
same manner as for the couple Mg.  Application of the superstructure loads is assumed at the top 
of the effective abutment stem, or one-half the girder height. 
Loads from the superstructure (per m length of abutment wall): 
The structural engineer has determined the following. 
TABLE B2-1: LOADS FROM SUPERSTRUCTURE 
 
Load 
Vertical, Pg 
(kN/m) 
Shear, Vg 
(kN/m) 
Couple, Mg 
(kN•m/m) 
Moment, Mtoe
(kN•m/m) 
Dead load of components 
(DC) 
169.22 42.61 -158.00 272.27 
Dead load of wearing 
surfaces (DW) 
19.99 16.64 -57.43 42.61 
Vehicular live load (LL) 48.60 22.91 -65.65 103.17 
Vehicular braking force (BR) 0.58 3.65 -10.02 6.31 
 
Dead loads of the footing and earth fill (per m length of abutment wall): 
Weight of the stem, Wstem: 
m/kN30.45
))m0.2(5.0046.0m24.5)(m51.0)(m/kN5.23(
)T5.0TH(TW
3
gfabutstemconcstem
=
−−=
−−γ=
 
m48.1
2/m51.0m22.1
2/TDarm stemtoestem
=
+=
+=
 
B - 19 

m/mkN04.67
)m48.1)(m/kN30.45(
)arm(WM stemstemtoe
⋅=
=
=
 
Weight of the footing, Wf (Bf in m): 
m/kNB81.10
B)m46.0)(m/kN5.23(
BTW
f
f
3
ffconcf
=
=
γ=
 
m2/Barm ff =  
m/mkNB41.5
)arm(WM
2
f
fftoe
⋅=
=
 
Weight of the soil over the toe, Wtoe:   
Assume granular backfill for toe and heel .  Calculate the 
weight of the soil over the toe for the minimum cover. 
)36,m/kN6.19( 3 °=φ′=γ
m/kN76.21
)m91.0)(m22.1)(m/kN6.19(
)TD)(D(W
3
fftoesoiltoe
=
=
−γ=
 
m61.0
2/m22.1
2/Darm toetoe
=
=
=
 
m/mkN27.13
)m61.0)(m/kN76.21(
)arm(WM toetoetoe
⋅=
=
=
 
Weight of the soil over the heel, Wh:  Bf in m 
m/kN)73.1B)(69.93(
)m46.0m24.5)(m51.0m22.1B)(m/kN6.19(
)TH)(TDB(W
f
f
3
fabutstemtoefsoilh
−=
−−−=
−−−γ=
 
B - 20 

mB5.0865.0
2
)m51.0m22.1B(m51.0m22.1
2
)TDB(TDarm
f
f
stemtoefstemtoeh
+=
−−++=
−−++=
 
m/mkN)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(
)arm(WM
ff
hhtoe
⋅+−=
=  
Loads from the approach fill: 
Earth Pressure Load:  It is assumed that at-rest earth pressures will exist behind the wall because 
the wall is restrained from rotating sufficiently to prevent active earth pressures from developing.  
Assume granular backfill (  behind the wall.  The coefficient of earth 
pressure at rest is 
)36,m/kN6.19 3 °=φ′=γ
41.0
36sin1
'sin1Ko
=
°−=
φ−=
 
m/kN32.110
)m24.5)(m/kN6.19)(41.0)(5.0(
HK)5.0(P
23
2
abutoo
−=
−=
γ−=
 
m75.1
3/m24.5
3/Harm abutPo
=
=
=
 
m/mkN06.193
)m75.1)(m/kN32.110(
)arm(PM oPotoe
⋅−=
−=
=
 
Horizontal earth pressure from live load surcharge:  Use HLS = 0.60 m. 
m/kN27.25
)m24.5)(m60.0)(m/kN6.19)(41.0(
H)HK(P
3
abutLSoLS
−=
−=
γ−=
 
B - 21 

m62.2
)m24.5)(5.0(
H)5.0(arm abutLS
=
=
=
 
m/mkN21.66
)m62.2)(m/kN27.25(
)arm(PM LSLStoe
⋅−=
−=
=
 
The above are summarized in Table B2-2. 
TABLE B2-2: LOADS OF ABUTMENT COMPONENTS AND 
HORIZONTAL EARTH PRESSURES 
 
Load 
Vertical 
(kN/m) 
Horizontal 
(kN/m) 
Moment, Mtoe 
(kN•m/m) 
Weight of stem (Wstem) 45.30 - 67.04 
Weight of footing (Wf) 10.81Bf - 5.41Bf
2 
Weight of soil over toe (Wtoe) 21.76 - 13.27 
Weight of soil over heel (Wh) (93.69)(Bf –1.73) - (93.69)(Bf –1.73)
*(0.865+0.5Bf) 
At-rest earth pressure load (Po) - -110.32 -193.06 
Horizontal earth load from live 
load surcharge (PLS) 
- -25.27 -66.21 
Note:  Bf = width of footing in m    
Step 6 – Field exploration and laboratory testing: 
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in Figure B2-1.  It was conservatively 
assumed that N′ (SPT blowcount corrected for overburden pressure) would not change after the 
construction of the approach embankment.  For this example, the subsurface data includes the 
structural fill under the footing. 
The initial vertical stresses are calculated using the layers shown in Figure B2-3.  The initial 
effective vertical stresses are defined as the stresses that exist after the approach embankment is 
constructed up to the bearing elevation (bottom of the footing).  Thus the initial vertical stresses 
at the midpoint of each layer are calculated as follows.  It is assumed that the approach 
embankment is constructed to its full height concurrently with the abutment and superstructure 
construction. 
B - 22 

Hard BASALT
Well-graded clean  SAND
(geologically  pre-loaded)Lay er 3
3.0 m
SPT  N-v alue
19
24
27
25
33
37
37
41
RQD = 80%
5.24 m
2
1
0.46 m 0.91 m
1.22 m
2.0 m
0.51 m
B1 .5 B
Structural fill (Well-graded silty  SAND & GRAVEL)
N  =  Uncorrected SPT Blowcount
Lay er 1
2.0 m Existing Ground
Surf ace
Key
Boring B-1
 φ =  38 deg  (assumed, N' = 32)
 γ =  20.5 kN/m 3
 φ =  friction angle
N'  =  Corrected SPT Blowcount
 γ =  18.6 kN/m3 ; N' = 44
 γsat =  19.6 kN/m 3 ; N' = 43
Lay er 4
3.0 m
Well-graded clean SAND
(geologically  pre-loaded)
Lay er 2
2.57 m
 
Figure B2-3: Layers Used in the Analysis 
Compute the initial vertical effective stresses at the midpoints of each layer below the footing: 
Layer 1:  Structural fill (H1 = 2.0 m) 
kPa5.20
)2/m0.2)(m/kN5.20(
)2/H(
3
11vo1
=
=
γ=σ′
 
Layer 2:  Structural fill (H2 = 2.57 m) 
kPa3.67
)2/m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20(
)2/H()H(
33
2211vo2
=
+=
γ+γ=σ′
 
Layer 3:  Well-graded clean sand (H3 = 3.0 m) 
( )
kPa6.121
)2/m0.3)(m/kN6.18()m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20(
2/H)H()H(
333
332211vo3
=
++=
γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
B - 23 

Layer 4: Saturated, well-graded clean sand (H4 = 3.0 m) 
( )
kPa1.164
)2/m0.3)(m/kN81.9m/kN6.19()m0.3)(m/kN6.18(
)m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20(
2/H)H()H()H(
333
33
44332211vo4
=
−+
++=
γ′+γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
Step 7 – Calculate allowable bearing capacity: 
Calculate the allowable bearing capacity, considering both the bearing capacity failure and 
settlement. 
Calculate qall Based on Bearing Capacity Failure: 
Use Equation 5-14. 
γγγγγ++= bsCNB5.0dbsCqNbscNq WfqqqWqqcccult  (Eqn. 5-14) 
In our example, the soils are all cohesionless, and c = 0.  So the first term becomes zero.  Assume 
no cover on the footing, so the second term also becomes zero.  Replace  with  from 
Figure 5-7 to account for slope effects.
γN qNγ
 
Look at footing widths of Bf = 2, 3, and 4 m. 
Bf = 2 m: 
55.12m0.2
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
This is greater than five, so the shape factor is 
1s =γ  (Table 5-2) 
The base of the footing is horizontal, so the base factor is 
1b =γ  (Table 5-5) 
The water table is 4.57 m + 3.0 m = 7.57 m below the base of the footing and is greater than 1.5 
Bf = (1.5)(2.0 m) = 3.0 m.  Therefore the ground water correction factor is 
1CW =γ  
A slope inclination angle of i = 26.6º (for 2H : 1V slope) will be used to obtain the bearing 
capacity factor, .  Although the upper portion of the slope is flatter, this will be more 
conservative. 
qNγ
69.0m0.2/m37.1B/D ff ==  
B - 24 

The drained friction angle of the structural fill is assumed to be °=φ′ 38 .  Using Figure 5-7c, for 
i = 26.6º and φ , the following are obtained: °=′ 38
.17N,0B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
.80N,1B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
By interpolation, for ,69.0B/D ff =  
60)1780)(69.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
Thus 
kPa1230
)1)(1)(1)(60)(m0.2)(m/kN5.20)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa410
3/kPa1230
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Bf  = 3 m: 
Proceeding in a similar manner, we obtain the following. 
533.8m0.3
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
1s =γ , , and C . 1b =γ 1W =γ
46.0m3/m37.1B/D ff ==  
By interpolation, for ,46.0B/D ff =  
46)1780)(46.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
Thus 
kPa1414
)1)(1)(1)(46)(m0.3)(m/kN5.20)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
B - 25 

Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa471
3/kPa1414
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Bf  = 4 m: 
Proceeding in a similar manner, we obtain the following. 
525.6m0.4
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
1s =γ , , and C . 1b =γ 1W =γ
34.0m4/m37.1B/D ff ==  
When Bf = 4 m, the potential failure surface can extend into Layer 3 (well-graded sand).  Check 
to determine if the design friction angle needs to be modified for the purpose of calculating 
bearing capacity.  From Figure B2-3, the average uncorrected SPT N-value for Layer 3 is about 
24.  The effective vertical stress at the midpoint of Layer 3 at the time of drilling was:  
)ft/kips58.0(kPa9.27)2/m3)(m/kN6.18()2/H( 23
33vodrilling ≅==γ=σ′  
Entering Figure 4-1 with a blowcount of 24 and a vertical effective stress of 0.58 ksf, a relative 
density, DR, of about 95 percent is read.  Entering Figure 4-2 with this relative density for a well-
graded sand (Unified Soil Classification ‘SW’), a friction angle of 39 degrees is obtained.  It is 
therefore conservative and acceptable to use φ′  of 38  to obtain . ° qNγ
By interpolation, for  ,34.0B/D ff =
38)1780)(34.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
Also use a weighted average of the soil unit weights in Layers 2 and 3: 
333
ave m/kN6.192
m/kN6.18m/kN5.20 =+=γ  
The bearing capacity is therefore: 
kPa1490
)1)(1)(1)(38)(m0.4)(m/kN6.19)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfaveult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
B - 26 

Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa497
3/kPa1490
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Calculate qall based on allowable settlement: 
To estimate the bridge loading to generate 25 mm of settlement, use both the Hough method and 
D’Appolonia’s method.  Use the Hough method to estimate the settlement in the structural fill 
Layers 1 and 2.  However, because the native sand of Layers 3 and 4 is known to be geologically 
preloaded, use D’Appolonia’s method to avoid overestimating the settlement in these layers.  
The total settlement can be calculated by summing the settlements in each layer. 
The Hough method estimates settlements based on average changes in stress for the layer.  
D’Appolonia’s method estimates settlements based on the applied stress at the top of the layer.  
Therefore, calculate the stress increase at the midpoint of Layers 1 and 2, and at the top of Layer 
3 using the 2-on-1 stress distribution method for footing widths of Bf = 2, 3, 4 m. 
)ZL)(ZB(
LB
q ff
ffv
++=σ∆  (Eqn. 5-17) 
where q = bridge loading per unit area at the base of the footing 
 Z = depth to the midpoint of a layer 
Using this equation, /q, the stress increases due to bridge footing loads are summarized in 
Table B2-3. 
Vσ∆
TABLE B2-3: STRESS INCREASE DUE TO BRIDGE LOADING 
Stress Increase, /q Vσ∆Soil Layer Effective Level 
of Loading 
Depth to 
Effective Level (m) Bf = 2 m Bf = 3 m Bf = 4 m 
1 Middle of Layer 1.0 0.64 0.72 0.77 
2 Middle of Layer 3.28 0.33 0.42 0.49 
3,4 Top of Layer 4.57 0.26 0.34 0.39 
 
Use the Hough method to estimate the settlement in Layers 1 and 2.  The general equation is: 






σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
vo
vvo
o
flogC
1HH  (Eqn. 5-24) 
Bearing capacity index (C′) for the structural fill of layers 1 and 2 is obtained from Figure 5-19.  
For structural fill consisting of well-graded silty sand & gravel, use the recommended corrected 
B - 27 

SPT N-value for compacted structural fill of 32.  Entering Figure 5-19 with N′ = 32 for well-
graded silty sand and gravel, a C′ of 110 is read. 
For a footing pressure, q, of 100 kPa and a footing width of Bf = 2 m, the settlement in Layers 1 
and 2 are calculated as follows. 
Layer 1: 
mm2.11m0112.0
kPa5.20
)kPa100)(64.0(kPa5.20log110
1)m2(
)q(qlog'C
1HH
1
1
1
vo
v
vo
1
11
==





 +=












σ′
σ∆
+σ′
=∆
 
Layer 2: 
mm4m004.0
kPa3.67
)kPa100)(33.0(kPa3.67log110
1)m57.2(
)q(qlog'C
1HH
2
2
2
vo
v
vo
2
22
==





 +=












σ′
σ∆
+σ′
=∆
 
Use D’Appolonia’s method to estimate the settlement in Layers 3 and 4.  General equation is: 
1o
fV
M
BH µµ



 σ∆=∆  (Eqn. 5-25) 
The modulus of compressibility of sand and gravel (M) for Layers 3 and 4 is obtained from 
Figure 5-21, and the correction factors ( oµ  and 1µ ) are obtained from Figure 5-20.  Combining 
Layers 3 and 4 into one layer, the average uncorrected SPT N-value for the layer is 30.  Entering 
Figure 5-21 with an average uncorrected blowcount of 30 and an M of 750 tsf, or 71820 kPa, is 
read for preloaded sand.  Entering the upper chart of Figure 5-20 for D = 4.57 m and B = 6.57 to 
8.57 m (based on the 2-on-1 stress distribution method and Bf = 2, 3, and 4 m), a µ  of 0.74 is 
read.  Entering the lower chart of Figure 5-20 for H = 6 m and B = 6.57 to 8.57 m, a µ of 0.25 is 
read.   
o
1
B - 28 

For a footing pressure of 100 kPa and a footing width of Bf = 2 m, the settlement in layers 3 and 
4 are calculated as follows. 
mm4.0m0004.0
)25.0)(74.0(kPa71820
)m57.6)(kPa100(26.0
M
)B)(q(qH 1o
4,3
f
v
4,3
4,3
==




=
µµ











 σ∆
=∆
 
The total settlement is therefore: 
mm164.00.42.11Hi =++=∆∑  
In a similar manner, the settlements for different widths and bridge loadings are obtained and are 
summarized as follows. 
TABLE B2-4: SETTLEMENTS DUE TO VARIOUS 
FOOTING PRESSURES AND WIDTHS 
Settlement (mm) Footing Pressure 
(kPa) Bf = 2 m Bf = 3 m Bf = 4 m 
100 16 17 19 
150 20 22 24 
200 23 26 28 
250 26 29 31 
 
Table B2-4 shows that the maximum allowable footing pressure to limit the settlement to 25 mm 
decreases from about 233 kPa for Bf = 2 m to about 163 kPa for Bf = 4 m.  These values are 
smaller than the qall values based on bearing capacity failure that were calculated earlier.   
Settlement will therefore limit the allowable bearing capacity for the design of this footing.  
Interpolating the values in Table B2-4, find ranges of footing widths that will limit settlement to 
25 mm or less at nominal allowable bearing capacities of 150 kPa, 190 kPa and 230 kPa. These 
are summarized in Table B2-5. 
B - 29 

TABLE B2-5: SETTLEMENT-LIMITED 
ALLOWABLE BEARING CAPACITIES 
Allowable Bearing Capacity 
(kPa) 
Range of Footing Widths That Will 
Limit Settlement to 25 mm 
230 ≤ 2.0 m 
190 2.0 to 3.0 m 
150 3.0 to 4.0 m 
 
The geotechnical engineer should provide this table to the structural designer for sizing of the 
footing.  
Step 8 – Calculate sliding and passive soil resistance: 
The footing concrete will be poured on compacted structural fill.  Therefore, the friction angle, 
, to be used in the sliding analysis of the footing will be δ °=φ′=δ 38 . 
The passive resistance of the soil in front of the footing will be ignored.  The ultimate sliding 
resistance is therefore: 
δ+= tan)PW(F vR  (Eqn. 5-38) 
)PW(78.0
)38tan()PW(
v
v
+=
°+=  
Step 9 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The geotechnical engineer has checked an abutment and approach embankment with the same 
dimensions and similar loading conditions but with a weaker foundation soil (silt with N′ = 10) 
and found that the minimum factor of safety was about 1.6 and satisfactory (see Example 3).  
Thus, with stronger foundation soils, the factor of safety should be greater than 1.6 and 
satisfactory. 
Step 10 – Size the footing under full loading: 
From Table B2-1, the total vertical load from the superstructure is 
m/kN39.238
m/kN58.0m/kN60.48m/kN99.19m/kN22.169
BRLLDWDCP structurev
=
+++=
+++=
 
Referring to Table B2-2, the additional load from the abutment components per 1-m length of the 
abutment wall for Bf = 3 m is  
B - 30 

m/kN48.21899.11876.2143.3230.45P
m/kN99.118)73.13)(69.93()73.1B)(69.93(W
m/kN76.21W
m/kN43.32)3)(81.10(B81.10W
m/kN30.45W
abutv
fh
toe
ff
stem
=+++=
=−=−=
=
===
=
 
Thus 
m/kN457
m/kN48.218m/kN39.238
PPP abutvstructurevv
=
+=
+=
 
From Table B2-5, an allowable bearing pressure of 190 kPa may be applied by the footing if Bf = 
2 to 3 m.  Using a footing pressure of 190 kPa, the required footing width Bf is 
m40.2
)kPa190/()m/kN457(
)kPa190/(PB vf
=
=
=
 
This satisfies Bf = 2 to 3 m but appears to be too small to meet overturning requirements for Habut 
= 5.24 m.  A preliminary dimension for a footing width can be estimated as one-half the 
abutment height, or Habut = (0.5)(5.24 m) = 2.62 m.  Therefore, try Bf = 2.7 m. 
Step 11 – Check overturning and sliding under full loading:  
Check overturning for Bf = 2.7 m: 
Analyze for 1 m of abutment wall length. 
From Step 10 and Table B2-1, the loads and moments due to the superstructure are 
m/kN39.238P structurev =  
m/mkN36.424
m/mkN31.6m/mkN17.103m/mkN61.42m/mkN27.272M structuretoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅+⋅+⋅=
 
Referring to Table B2-2, the loads and moments due to abutment components are 
m/kN13.187
)73.17.2)(69.93(76.21)7.2)(81.10(30.45
)73.1B)(69.93(76.21B81.1030.45P ffabutv
=
−+++=
−+++=
 
B - 31 

m/mkN78.61
21.6606.193
))7.2)(5.0(865.0)(73.17.2)(69.93(27.13)7.2)(41.5(04.67
21.6606.193
)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(27.13B41.504.67M
2
ff
2
fabuttoe
⋅=
−−
+−+++=
−−
+−+++=
 
The total loads and moments are: 
m/kN52.425
m/kN13.187m/kN39.238
PPP abutvstructurevv
=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN14.486
m/mkN78.61m/mkN36.424
MMM abuttoestructuretoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is 
m14.1
m/kN52.425
m/mkN14.486
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is 
m21.0
m14.1m35.1
m14.12/m7.2
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
For stability, the eccentricity should be less than one-sixth the footing width: 
m45.06/m7.26/Bm21.0e fy ==<=  (OK) 
Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
m28.2
)m21.0)(2(m7.2
e2BB yff
=
−=
−=′
 
B - 32 

kPa6.186
)m28.2)(m/kN52.425(
B/Pq fvfooting
=
=
′=
 
From Table B2-5, the allowable bearing pressure for B′f = 2 to 3 m is 190 kPa.  Therefore, 
 and the bearing stress is smaller than the allowable value.  (OK) allfooting qq <
Check sliding: 
In Table B2-1, the vehicular live load (LL) and the vehicular braking force (BR) act to resist 
sliding.  To be conservative, these two loads will be ignored in the sliding analysis.  The forces 
that tend to induce sliding are the sum of the following: 
Shear from the dead load of components, DC  (Table B2-1) 
Shear from the dead load of wearing surfaces, DW (Table B2-1) 
At-rest earth pressure load, Po  (Table B2-2) 
Horizontal earth load from live load surcharge, PLS  (Table B2-2) 
Analyzing per m length of the abutment wall, Fsliding is 
m/kN34.76
27.2532.11064.1661.42
PPDWDCF LSosliding
−=
−−+=
+++=
 
The force FR available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
() vR PW78.0F +=  
Neglecting the vehicular live load (LL) and vehicular breaking force (BR): 
m/kN21.189m/kN99.1922.169
DWDCP structurev
=+=
+=
 
m/kN13.187PW abutv ==  
B - 33 

The factor of safety FS against sliding is 
()
8.3
m/kN34.76
m/kN54.293
m/kN34.76
m/kN13.187m/kN21.18978.0
F
FFS
sliding
R
=
=
+=
=
 
FS >1.5  (OK) 
 
Step 12 – Complete structural design of the footing: 
The structural engineer completes this step. 
B - 34 

EXAMPLE 3: STUB SEAT-TYPE BRIDGE ABUTMENT ON STRUCTURAL FILL 
Given: 
• A seat-type abutment on a spread footing is proposed for a bridge. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• The footing length is L = 25.0 m (82 ft); other dimensions are shown in Figure B3-1. 
• The approach embankment and the foundation conditions are shown in Figure B3-1. 
• The SPT hammer energy ratio is assumed to be ER = 60%. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 38 mm (1.5 in). 
• Abutment loading symbols are shown in Figure B3-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Service Load Design, Group IV loads (allowable stress design 
method), considering both settlement and bearing capacity.  Check overturning and 
sliding. 
5.24 m
2
1
0.46 m 0.91 m
1.22 m
2.0 m
0.51 m
B1 .5 B
Dense GRAVEL
Structural fill (Well-graded silty  SAND & GRAVEL)
SILT
Well-graded fine to medium silty  SAND
N  =  Uncorrected SPT Blowcount
4.57 m
6.0 m
6.0 m
Existing Ground
Surf ace
Key
Boring B-1
SPT  N-v alue
5
4
6
6
7
11
8
10
15
19
22
28
> 50
> 50
 φ =  38 deg  (assumed, N' = 32)
 γ =  20.5 kN/m3
 γ =  17.3 kN/m 3
 φ =  friction angle
 γsat  =  19.6 kN/m 3
N'  =  Corrected SPT Blowcount
 
Figure B3-1: Approach Embankment and Foundation Soils 
B - 35 

 
P
H/3
0.5 H
Wh
Wst em
Wf
Wtoe
V
Active  Earth
Pressure, pa
Live  Load
Surcharge, p LS
PA
PLS
 
Footing
Habut
Bf
Tf
Dtoe
Tstem
Superstructure
Backfill
TGS
Toe
Mtoe
Stem  and
Girder  Seat
 
Figure B3-2: Abutment Loading Symbols 
B - 36 

Solution: 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:   
The structural, hydraulic and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required design 
information is provided in the problem-given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
Moments are taken about the front toe of the footing.  The direction of the moment is positive for 
resisting moments (counterclockwise) and negative for overturning moments (clockwise). 
Loads from the girders: 
The structural engineer has provided Group IV loads as summarized in Table B3-1.  Recall that 
Group IV is the SLD load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge without wind, and 
with consideration of long term shrinkage, shortening, and thermal movements. 
TABLE B3-1: LOADS FROM GIRDERS 
 
Load 
Vertical, P 
(kN) 
Shear, V 
(kN) 
Moment, Mtoe 
(kN•m) 
Dead load of components 
(DC) 
5233 - 7274 
Dead load of wearing 
surfaces (DW) 
446 - 620 
Vehicular live load (LL) 1538 - 2138 
Shear loads from bearing 
pads (V) 
- 1047 -3392 
 
Dead loads of the abutment components (per m of abutment wall, assume γconcrete = 23.5 kN/m3) 
Weight of the stem, Wstem (for simplicity, this computation does not subtract out the weight of 
the seat): 
m/kN29.57
)m46.0m24.5)(m51.0)(m/kN5.23(
)TH(TW
3
fabutstemconcstem
=
−=
−γ=
 
m48.1
2/m51.0m22.1
2/TDarm stemtoestem
=
+=
+=
 
B - 37 

m/mkN79.84
)m48.1)(m/kN29.57(
)arm(WM stemstemtoe
⋅=
=
=
 
Weight of the footing, Wf (Bf in m): 
m/kNB81.10
B)m46.0)(m/kN5.23(
BTW
f
f
3
ffconcf
=
=
γ=
 
m2/Barm ff =  
m/mkNB41.5
)arm(WM
2
f
fftoe
⋅=
=
 
In this example, the weight of the soil over the toe, Wtoe, is ignored for design purposes because 
the soil may not get placed until after the bridge superstructure is constructed.  Assume granular 
backfill for toe and heel . )36,m/kN6.19( 3 °=φ′=γ
Weight of the soil over the heel, Wh (Bf in m): 
m/kN)73.1B)(69.93(
)m46.0m24.5)(m51.0m22.1B)(m/kN6.19(
)TH)(TDB(W
f
f
3
fabutstemtoefsoilh
−=
−−−=
−−−γ=
 
mB5.0865.0
2
)m51.0m22.1B(m51.0m22.1
2
)TDB(TDarm
f
f
stemtoefstemtoeh
+=
−−++=
−−++=
 
m/mkN)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(
)arm(WM
ff
hhtoe
⋅+−=
=  
Loads from Approach Fill: 
Active earth pressure:  Assume that the stem wall will rotate sufficiently to develop active earth 
pressures behind the wall.  Use Rankine’s active earth pressure coefficient.  Assume granular 
backfill  behind the wall. )36,m/kN6.19( 3 °=φ′=γ
B - 38 





 φ−°= 2
'45tanK 2
a  (Eqn. 6-3) 
26.0
2
3645tan2
=




 °−°=  
m/kN96.69
)24.5)(m/kN6.19)(26.0)(5.0(
HK)5.0(P
23
2
abutaA
=
=
γ=
 
m75.1
3/m24.5
3/Harm abutPA
=
=
=
 
m/mkN43.122
)m75.1)(m/kN96.69(
)arm(PM APAtoe
⋅−=
−=
−=
 
Horizontal earth pressure from live load surcharge (use HLS = 0.60 m): 
m/kN02.16
)m24.5)(m60.0)(m/kN6.19)(26.0(
H)HK(P
3
abutLSaLS
=
=
γ=
 
m62.2
)m24.5)(5.0(
H)5.0(arm abutLS
=
=
=
 
m/mkN97.41
)m62.2)(m/kN02.16(
)arm(PM LSLStoe
⋅−=
−=
−=
 
These loads are summarized in Table B3-2. 
B - 39 

TABLE B3-2: LOADS OF ABUTMENT COMPONENTS 
AND HORIZONTAL EARTH PRESSURES 
 
Load 
Vertical 
(kN/m) 
Horizontal 
(kN/m) 
Moment, Mtoe 
(kN•m/m) 
Weight of stem (Wstem) 57.29 - 84.79 
Weight of footing (Wf) 10.81Bf - 5.41Bf
2 
Weight of soil over toe (Wtoe) - - - 
Weight of soil over heel (Wh) (93.69)(Bf –1.73) - (93.69)(Bf –1.73)
*(0.865+0.5Bf) 
Active earth pressure load (PA) - 69.96 -122.43 
Horizontal earth load from live 
load surcharge (PLS) 
- 16.02 -41.97 
Note:  Bf = width of footing in m    
Step 6 – Conduct subsurface exploration and laboratory testing: 
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in Figure B3-1.  It was conservatively 
assumed that N′ (SPT blowcount corrected for overburden pressure) would not change after the 
construction of the approach embankment.  For this example, the subsurface data include the 
structural fill under the footing. 
The initial vertical stresses are calculated using the layers shown in Figure B3-3.  The initial 
vertical stresses were calculated as the stresses that exist after the approach embankment is 
constructed to its full height.  These are estimated by using the depth from the estimated ground 
surface of the approach embankment after its construction, as shown in Figure B3-3.  The initial 
vertical stresses at the midpoint of each layer are calculated as follows. 
Layer 1:  Structural fill (H1 = 2.0 m); note that the height of backfill is taken as the average 
height of the surcharge at the stem: 
kPa1.89
)2/m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H()m5.3(
33
11backfillvo1
=
+=
γ+γ=σ′
 
Layer 2:  Structural fill (H2 = 2.57 m) 
kPa9.135
)2/m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H(H)m5.3(
333
2211backfillvo2
=
++=
γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
 
B - 40 

3.5 m
2
1
0.46 m 0.91 m
1.22 m
2.0 m
0.51 m
B 1.5 B
Dense GRAVEL
Structural fill (Well-graded silty  SAND & GRAVEL)
SILT
Well-graded fine to medium
silty  SAND
N  =  Uncorrected SPT Blowcount
 Lay er 1
2.0 m Existing Ground
Surf ace
Key
Boring B-1
SPT  N-v alue
5
4
6
6
7
11
8
10
15
19
22
28
> 50
> 50
 φ =  38 deg  (assumed, N' = 32)
 γ =  20.5 kN/m 3
 γ =  17.3 kN/m 3
 φ =  f riction angle
 γsat  =  19.6 kN/m 3
N'  =  Corrected SPT Blowcount
Lay er 2
2.57 m
Lay er 3
3.0 m
Lay er 4
3.0 m
Lay er 5
3.0 m
Lay er 6
3.0 m
N' = 10
N' = 10
N' = 15
N' = 20
Estimated  surf ace  of
approach  embankment
to  calculate σVo
 γbackfill =  19.6 kN/m3
 
Figure B3-3: Layers Used in the Analysis 
Layer 3:  Silt (H3 = 3.0 m) 
kPa2.188
)2/m0.3)(m/kN3.17(
)m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H(HH)m5.3(
3
333
332211backfillvo3
=
+
++=
γ+γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
B - 41 

Layer 4: Silt (H4 = 3.0 m) 
kPa1.240
)2/m0.3)(m/kN3.17()m0.3)(m/kN3.17(
)m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H()H(HH)m5.3(
33
333
44332211backfillvo4
=
++
++=
γ+γ+γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
Layer 5: Saturated silty sand (H5 = 3.0 m) 
kPa7.280
)2/m0.3)(m/kN81.96.19(
)m0.3)(m/kN3.17()m0.3)(m/kN3.17(
)m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H()H()H(HH)m5.3(
3
33
333
5544332211backfillvo5
=
−+
++
++=
γ+γ+γ+γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
Layer 6: Saturated silty sand (H6 = 3.0 m) 
kPa1.310
)2/m0.3)(m/kN81.96.19()m0.3)(m/kN81.96.19(
)m0.3)(m/kN3.17()m0.3)(m/kN3.17(
)m57.2)(m/kN5.20()m0.2)(m/kN5.20()m5.3)(m/kN6.19(
)2/H()H()H()H(HH)m5.3(
33
33
333
665544332211backfillvo6
=
−+−+
++
++=
γ+γ+γ+γ+γ+γ+γ=σ′
 
Step 7 – Calculate allowable bearing capacity: 
Calculate the allowable bearing capacity, considering both bearing capacity failure and 
settlement. 
First calculate qall using bearing capacity theory: 
γγγγγ++= bsCNB5.0dbsCqNbscNq WfqqqWqqcccult  (Eqn. 5-14) 
In this example, the soils are all cohesionless, and c = 0.  So the first term becomes zero.  
Assume no cover on the footing, so the second term also becomes zero.  Replace  with 
from Figure 5-7 to account for slope effects.
γN
qNγ  
Look at footing widths of Bf = 3, 4 and 5 m. 
B - 42 

Bf = 3 m: 
533.8m0.3
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
This ratio is greater than five, so the shape factor is 
1s =γ  (Table 5-2) 
The base of the footing is horizontal, therefore the base factor is 
1b =γ  (Table 5-5) 
The water table is 4.57 m + 6.0 m = 10.57 m below the base of the footing and is greater than 1.5 
Bf = (1.5)(3.0 m) = 4.5 m.  Therefore, the ground water correction factor is 
1CW =γ  (Table 5-3) 
A slope inclination angle of  i= 26.6º (for 2H : 1V slope) will be used to obtain the bearing 
capacity factor   This will be conservative, even though the upper portion of the slope is 
flatter. 
.N qγ
46.0m0.3/m37.1B/D ff ==  
The drained friction angle of the structural fill is assumed to be °=φ′ 38 .  Using Figure 5-7f, for 
i = 26.6º and φ , the following are obtained: °=′ 38
.17N,0B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
.80N,1B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
By interpolation, for  ,46.0B/D ff =
46)1780)(46.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
The ultimate bearing capacity is 
kPa1414
)1)(1)(1)(46)(m0.3)(m/kN5.20)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
B - 43 

Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa471
3/kPa1414
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Bf  = 4 m: 
Proceeding in a similar manner, 
525.6m0.4
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
1s =γ , , and C  1b =γ 1W =γ
34.0m4/m37.1B/D ff ==  
By interpolation, for ,34.0B/D ff =  
When Bf = 4 m, the potential failure surface can extend into Unit 3 (silt).  To determine how 
much of the failure surface will engage Unit 3, use the rule of thumb that the failure surface will 
extend to a maximum depth of about 1.5 times the footing width, or in this case 1.5(4 m) = 6 m.  
This extends about 1.5 m into Unit 3, which corresponds to about one-half of the failure surface 
passing through Unit 3 (visually estimated from Figure B3-1).  Therefore, use a weighted 
average friction angle to obtain .  A design friction angle associated with Layer 3 is needed.  
From Figure B3-3, the average uncorrected SPT N-value for this layer is about 5.2.  The 
effective vertical stress at the midpoint at the time of drilling was: 
qNγ
23
33v ft/kips54.0kPa95.25)2/m3)(m/kN3.17()2/H(drilling ≅==γ=σ′  
Entering Figure 4-1 with a blowcount of 5.2 and a vertical effective stress of 0.54 ksf, a relative 
density, DR, of about 50 percent is read.  Entering Figure 4-2 with this relative density for lean 
silt (Unified Soil Classification ‘ML’), a friction angle of 32º is obtained.  Use a reduced φ′  from 
 to 34  to obtain .  Using Figure 5-7, for i = 26.6º and °38 ° qNγ °=φ′ 34 , the following is 
obtained: 
() ( ) 23124334.012N q ≅−+=γ  
Use a weighted average of the soil unit weights in Units 2 and 3: 
33
average m/kN9.182
m/kN3.17m/kN5.20 =+=γ  
B - 44 

The ultimate bearing capacity is 
kPa869
)1)(1)(1)(23)(m0.4)(m/kN9.18)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa290
3/kPa869
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Bf  = 5 m: 
Proceeding in a similar manner, 
5m0.5
m0.25
B
L
f
f ==  
1s =γ , , and C . 1b =γ 1W =γ
27.0m5/m37.1B/D ff ==  
When Bf = 5 m, the potential failure surface can extend deeply into Unit 3 (silt).  Therefore, 
conservatively use Unit 3 soil properties (γ = 17.3 kN/m3, φ = 32 degrees) to compute bearing 
capacity: 
.7N,0B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
.32N,1B/DFor qff ≅= γ  
By interpolation, for  ,27.0B/D ff =
14)732)(27.0(7N q ≅−+=γ  
Thus 
kPa605
)1)(1)(1)(14)(m0.5)(m/kN3.17)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
B - 45 

Using a factor of safety of 3, the allowable bearing capacity is 
kPa202
3/kPa605
3/qq ultall
=
=
=
 
Calculate qall based on allowable settlement: 
Since the embankment weight is so large, settlement due to approach embankment construction 
is, in general, much greater than the settlement due to bridge loading alone.  Due to the presence 
of the compressible silt, the settlement due to the approach embankment alone was computed 
using the FHWA program EMBANK.  The input parameters for soil unit weight and 
compression index shown below were estimated from the subsurface exploration SPT N-values 
per the Hough method.  The EMBANK output is shown in Figure B3-4. 
 
┌───── ONE DIMENSIONAL SETTLEMENT ANALYSIS/Federal Highway Administration ─────┐ 
│            INCREMENT OF STRESSES BENEATH THE END OF FILL CONDITION           │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│ Project Name   : Example 3            Client          : Shallow Fnd GEC      │ 
│ File Name      : Ex3.dat              Project Manager :                      │ 
│ Date           : 12/20/01             Computed by     : rek                  │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│            Settlement for X = 106.00 (ft)       Y =  64.00 (ft)              │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│ Embank. slope, x direc. =   64.00 (ft)  Height of fill H    =   32.00 (ft)   │ 
│                y direc. =   64.00 (ft)  Unit weight of fill =  130.00 (pcf)  │ 
│ Embankment top width    =   82.00 (ft)  p load/unit area    = 4160.00 (psf)  │ 
│ Embankment bottom width =  210.00 (ft)  Foundation Elev.    =  100.00 (ft)   │ 
│ Ground Surface Elev.    =  100.00 (ft)                                       │ 
│ Water table Elev.       =   80.00 (ft)  Unit weight of Wat. =   62.40 (pcf)  │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│      LAYER            COMP.   RECOMP.   SWELL.     UNIT           Settlement │ 
│ No.  TYPE  THICK.     (1/C’)   RATIO              WEIGHT                     │ 
│             (ft)                                   (pcf)             (in.)   │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│  1   COMP.  20.0      0.033    0.003    0.000     110.00              5.73   │ 
│  2   COMP.  10.0      0.020    0.002    0.000     125.00              0.93   │ 
│  3   COMP.  10.0      0.017    0.002    0.000     125.00              0.65   │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│                                              Total Settlement =       7.31   │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│           SUBLAYER                  SOIL STRESSES                            │ 
│    NدTHICK.  ELEV.   INITIAL  INCREMENT  MAX.PAST PRESS.   SETTLEMENT     │ 
│         (ft)     (ft)    (psf)     (psf)       (psf)             (in.)       │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│     1  10.00    95.00    550.00   4073.24      550.00             3.66       │ 
│     2  10.00    85.00   1650.00   3846.32     1650.00             2.07       │ 
│     3  10.00    75.00   2513.00   3614.73     2513.00             0.93       │ 
│     4  10.00    65.00   3139.00   3373.09     3139.00             0.65       │ 
│                                                                              │ 
│                                          Total Settlement =       7.31 (in.) │ 
│                                                           =       186 mm     │ 
└───── Hit arrow keys to display next screen. <F8> Print. <F10> Main Menu ─────┘ 
 
Figure B3-4: Summary Output of EMBANK Settlement Analysis 
B - 46 

The settlement was computed to be 186 mm.  This is excessive for the bridge.  It will therefore 
be necessary to mitigate the settlement by surcharging the site prior to construction of the 
abutment foundation.  The contract will specify that the embankment must be built full height 
and to full dimensions and settlement monitored until complete, before excavating back down to 
the bearing elevation and constructing the footing.  Since the settlement potential is mostly due 
to the inelastic silt layer, the settlement should occur relatively quickly, and the potential for 
post-construction settlement due to secondary consolidation (creep) will be low.  Therefore, a 
spread footing is still a cost-effective foundation choice for this site. 
The design of the abutment footing will therefore need to consider only the potential settlement 
due to the structure loads, as follows: 
Calculate the stress increase at the midpoint of each soil layer using the 2-on-1 stress distribution 
method for footing widths of Bf = 3, 4, 5 m. 
)ZL)(ZB(
LB
q ff
ffv
++=σ∆  (Eqn. 5-17) 
Using this equation, /q ratios are tabulated in Table B3-3. Vσ∆
TABLE B3-3: STRESS INCREASE DUE TO BRIDGE LOADING 
Stress Increase, Vσ∆ /q 
Soil Layer 
Depth to 
Midpoint (m) Bf = 3 m Bf = 4 m Bf = 5 m 
1 1.0 0.72 0.77 0.80 
2 3.28 0.42 0.49 0.53 
3 6.07 0.27 0.32 0.36 
4 9.07 0.18 0.22 0.26 
5 12.07 0.13 0.17 0.20 
6 15.07 0.10 0.13 0.16 
 
Use the Hough method to estimate the bridge loading to generate 38 mm of settlement. 
General equation is: 






σ′
σ∆+σ
′=∆
vo
vvoo
'logC
1HH  (Eqn. 5-24) 
Bearing capacity index (C′) of the layers are obtained from Figure 5-19 as follows.  This assumes 
N, and therefore N′ is unchanged after pre-loading, which is conservative. 
Layers 1 and 2: Structural fill consisting of well-graded silty sand & gravel 
B - 47 

Use the recommended assumed corrected SPT N-value for compacted structural fill: 
32'N =  
From Figure 5-19, C′1,2 = 110. 
Layer 3: Alluvium consisting of inorganic silt 
Nave = 5.2   (Figure B3-3) 
The effective vertical pressure at the time of drilling was 
kPa9.25)2/m3)(m/kN3.17()2/H( 3
33vo 3drilling ==γ=σ′  
Thus N′/N = 1.92  (Figure 5-18). 
N′ = 10 
C′3 = 30  (Figure 5-19) 
Layer 4: Alluvium consisting of inorganic silt 
Nave = 9.0  (Figure B3-3) 
kPa8.77
kPa95.25kPa95.25kPa95.25
)2/m3)(m/kN3.17()2/m3)(m/kN3.17(kPa95.25
)2/H()2/H(
33
4433vovo 3drilling4drilling
=
++=
++=
γ+γ+σ′=σ′
 
N′/N = 1.11  (Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 10 
C′4 = 30   (Figure 5-19) 
Layer 5: Alluvium consisting of well-graded fine to medium sand 
Nave = 17.0   (Figure B3-3) 
kPa5.118
kPa69.14kPa95.25kPa85.77
)2/m3(m/kN81.96.19()2/m3)(m/kN3.17(kPa85.77
)2/H()2/H(
33
5544vovo 4drilling5drilling
=
++=
−++=
γ′+γ+σ′=σ′
 
B - 48 

N′/N = 0.9   (Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 15 
C′5 = 50   (Figure 5-19) 
Layer 6: Alluvium consisting of well-graded fine to medium sand 
Nave = 25.0   (Figure B3-3) 
kPa9.147
kPa69.14kPa69.14kPa49.118
)2/m3(m/kN81.96.19()2/m3(m/kN81.96.19(kPa49.118
)2/H()2/H(
33
6655vovo 5drilling6drilling
=
++=
−+−+=
γ′+γ′+σ′=σ′
 
N′/N = 0.805 (Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 20 
C′6 = 58   (Figure 5-19) 
The total settlement can be calculated by summing the settlements in each layer.  For a range of 
bridge loadings from, say, q = 100 kPa to 300 kPa and footing widths of Bf = 3 m to 5 m, the 
settlements are calculated as follows: 
Layer 1: 
mm5m0047.0
kPa1.89
)kPa100)(72.0(kPa1.89log110
1m2
logC
1HH
1
11
vo
vvo
1
11
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
Layer 2: 
mm3m0027.0
kPa9.135
)kPa100)(42.0(kPa9.135log110
1m57.2
logC
1HH
2
22
vo
vvo
2
22
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
B - 49 

Layer 3: 
mm6m0058.0
kPa2.188
)kPa100)(27.0(kPa2.188log30
1m0.3
logC
1HH
3
33
vo
vvo
3
33
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
Layer 4: 
mm3m0031.0
kPa1.240
)kPa100)(18.0(kPa1.240log30
1m0.3
logC
1HH
4
44
vo
vvo
4
44
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
Layer 5: 
mm1m0012.0
kPa7.280
)kPa100)(13.0(kPa7.280log50
1m0.3
logC
1HH
5
55
vo
vvo
5
55
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
Layer 6: 
mm1m0007.0
kPa1.310
)kPa100)(10.0(kPa1.310log58
1m0.3
logC
1HH
6
66
vo
vvo
6
66
≅=





 +



=








σ′
σ∆+σ′
′=∆
 
The total settlement is: 
mm19113635Hi =+++++=∆∑  
In a similar manner, the settlements for different footing widths and bridge loadings are 
calculated and summarized in Table B3-4. 
B - 50 

TABLE B3-4: SETTLEMENTS DUE TO BRIDGE LOADING 
Settlement (mm) Bridge Loading 
q (kPa) Bf = 3 m Bf = 4 m Bf = 5 m 
100 19 21 24 
200 33 38 42 
300 46 53 59 
 
Table B3-4 shows that the maximum allowable q to limit the settlement to 38 mm decreases 
from about 238 kPa for Bf = 3 m to about 178 kPa for Bf = 5 m.  These values are smaller than 
the qall values based on bearing capacity failure that were calculated earlier.  Therefore, the 
settlement will limit the allowable bearing capacity of the footings. 
The allowable bearing pressure is summarized in Figure B3-5. 
100
200
300
400
23 45 6
Footing width, Bf (m)
Allowable bearing pressure (kPa)
 
Figure B3-5: Allowable Bearing Pressure as a Function of Footing Width 
Step 8 – Calculate sliding and passive soil resistance: 
The footing concrete will be poured on compacted structural fill.  Thus the friction angle, δ , to 
be used in the sliding analysis of the footing will be °=φ′=δ 38 . 
The passive resistance of the soil in front of the footing will be ignored.  The ultimate sliding 
resistance is therefore: 
δ+= tan)PW(F vR  (Eqn. 5-38) 
)PW(78.0
)38tan()PW(
v
o
v
+=
+=  
B - 51 

Step 9 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The slope stability program XSTABLTM was used to evaluate the global stability of the approach 
embankment with the abutment and the bridge loading applied.  The program uses Bishop’s 
method of slices to compute a global stability factor of safety for the slope.  A footing width of 
Bf = 3.5 m was assumed.  The footing loads and the abutment backfill were modeled as applied 
vertical surcharge loads at the footing bearing elevation.  The applied footing stress corresponded 
to the allowable bearing pressure for this footing width (e.g., 240 kPa from Figure B3-4).  At this 
stress, the critical failure surface was just behind the heel of the footing.  The minimum factor of 
safety was about 1.6 and satisfactory.  The potential failure arc is shown in Figure B3-6. 
2
1
Dense GRAVEL
Structural fill
(Well-graded silty
SAND & GRAVEL)
SILT
Well-graded fine to
medium s ilty SAND
FS = 1.6
Live  load  surcharge
 
Figure B3-6: Global Stability 
Step 10 – Size the footing under full loading: 
From Table B3-1, the total vertical load from the bridge girders is 
kN7217
kN1538kN446kN5233
LLDWDCP
=
++=
++=
 
Using Lf = 25 m, 
B - 52 

m/kN7.288
m25
kN7217
L
PP
f
girdersv
=
=
=
  
The additional load from the abutment components per 1-m length of the abutment wall is 
calculated as follows for Bf = 3 m. 
m/kN71.20899.11843.3229.57P
m/kN99.118
)73.13)(69.93(
)73.1B)(69.93(W
m/kN43.32)3)(81.10(B81.10W
m/kN29.57W
abutv
fh
ff
stem
=++=
=
−=
−=
===
=
 
Thus 
m/kN497
m/kN7.208m/kN7.288
PPP abutvgirdersvv
≅
+=
+=
 
From Figure B3-4, a bearing pressure of up to 230 kPa may be applied by the footing.  Using q = 
230 kPa, the required footing width Bf is 
m16.2
)kPa230/()m/kN497(
q/PB vf
=
=
=
 
This appears to be too small for Habut = 5.24 m.  A preliminary dimension for a footing width can 
be estimated as one-half the abutment height, or Habut = (0.5)(5.24 m) = 2.62 m.  Therefore, try 
Bf = 2.7 m. 
Step 11a – Check overturning (eccentricity), bearing pressure and sliding under full 
loading without PDW and PLL:  
Check overturning for Bf = 2.7 m: 
Analyze for 1 m of abutment length. 
From Table B3-1, the loads and moments due to girders are 
B - 53 

m/kN3.209
m25
kN5233
L
kN5233P
f
girdersv
=
=
=
 
m/mkN3.155
m25
mkN3882
L
mkN)33927274(M
f
girderstoe
⋅=
⋅=
⋅−=
 
From Table B3-2, the loads and moments due to abutment components are 
m/kN4.177
m/kN)73.17.2)(69.93()7.2)(81.10(29.57
m/kN)73.1B)(69.93(B81.1029.57P ffabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 
m/mkN1.161
97.4143.122
))m7.2)(5.0(865.0)(73.1m7.2)(69.93()7.2)(41.5(79.84
97.4143.122)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(B41.579.84M
2
ff
2
fabuttoe
⋅=
−−
+−++=
−−+−++=
 
The total loads are 
m/kN7.386
m/kN4.177m/kN3.209
PPP abutvgirdersvv
=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN4.316
m/mkN1.161m/mkN3.155
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is 
m82.0
)m/kN7.386/()m/mkN4.316(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
B - 54 

The eccentricity, ey, is 
m53.0
m82.0m35.1
m82.02/m7.2
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
For stability, the eccentricity should be less than one-sixth the footing width: 
m45.06/m7.26/Bm53.0e fy ==<=  (No Good) 
Try increasing Bf to 3.2 m. 
Check overturning for Bf = 3.2 m: 
Analyze for 1 m of abutment length. 
From the previous calculations, the loads and moments due to girders are 
m/kN3.209P girdersv =  
m/mkN3.155M girderstoe ⋅=  
From Table B3-2, the loads and moments due to abutment components are 
m/kN6.229
m/kN)73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(81.10(29.57
m/kN)73.1B)(69.93(B81.1029.57P ffabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 
m/mkN3.315
97.4143.122
))m2.3)(5.0(865.0)(73.1m2.3)(69.93()2.3)(41.5(79.84
97.4143.122)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(B41.579.84M
2
ff
2
fabuttoe
⋅=
−−
+−++=
−−+−++=
 
The total loads are 
m/kN9.438
m/kN6.229m/kN3.209
PPP abutvgridersvv
=
+=
+=
 
B - 55 

m/mkN6.470
m/mkN3.315m/mkN3.155
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is 
m07.1
)m/kN9.438/()m/mkN6.470(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is 
m527.0
m07.1m6.1
m07.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
For stability, the eccentricity should be less than one-sixth the footing width: 
m533.06/m2.36/Bm527.0e fy ==<=  (OK) 
Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
yf e2BB f −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m14.2
)m53.0)(2(m2.3
=
−=  
kPa1.205
)m14.2/()m/kN9.438(
B/Pq fv
=
=
′=
 
By extrapolating the values in Figure B3-4, the allowable bearing pressure for B′f = 2.14 m to 
limit settlement to less than 38 mm is about 
kPa275qall =  
Under Group IV loads, the 25 percent overstress allowance can be applied to this allowable 
bearing pressure.  By inspection, however, this computation is not necessary since , and 
the bearing stress is smaller than the allowable value.  (OK) 
allqq <
Check sliding: 
The forces, Fsliding, that tend to induce sliding are the sum of the following: 
B - 56 

Shear loads from bearing pads, V  (Table B3-1) 
Active earth pressure load, PA  (Table B3-2) 
Horizontal earth load from live load surcharge, PLS  (Table B3-2) 
Analyzing per m of the abutment wall, Fsliding is 
m/kN9.127
m/kN02.16m/kN96.69m25/kN1047
PPL/VF LSAfsliding
=
++=
++=
 
The force, FR, available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The vertical force, Pv computed above includes the self-weight of the footing, W.  The live load 
and weight of the wearing surface should not be included in this calculation.  Thus the factor of 
safety FS against sliding is 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
7.2
m/kN9.127
m/kN3.342
m/kN9.127
)m/kN9.438(78.0
=
=
=
 
Step 11b – Check overturning, bearing pressure and sliding under full loading:  
Check overturning for Bf = 3.2 m: 
Analyze for 1 m of abutment length. 
From Table B3-1, the loads and moments due to girders are 
m/kN7.288
m25
kN7217
L
kN)15384465233(P
f
girdersv
=
=
++=
 
B - 57 

m/mkN6.265
m25
mkN6640
L
mkN)339221386207274(M
f
girderstoe
⋅=
⋅=
⋅−++=
 
From Step 11a, the loads and moments due to abutment components are 
m/kN6.229P abutv =  
m/mkN3.315M abuttoe ⋅=  
The total loads are 
m/kN3.518
m/kN6.229m/kN7.288
PPP abutvgirdersvv
=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN9.580
m/mkN3.315m/mkN6.265
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is 
m12.1
)m/kN3.518/()m/mkN9.580(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is 
m48.0
m12.1m6.1
m12.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
For stability, the eccentricity should be less than one-sixth the footing width: 
m53.06/m2.36/Bm48.0e fy ==<=  (OK) 
 
B - 58 

Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
yf e2BB f −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m24.2
)m48.0)(2(m2.3
=
−=  
kPa4.231
)m24.2/()m/kN3.518(
B/Pq fv
=
=
′=
 
By extrapolating the values in Figure B3-4, the allowable bearing pressure for B′f = 2.24 m to 
limit settlement to less than 38 mm is about 
kPa270qall =  
Under Group IV loads, the 25 percent overstress allowance can be applied to this allowable 
bearing pressure.  By inspection, however, this computation is not necessary since , and 
the bearing stress is smaller than the allowable value.  (OK) 
allqq <
Check sliding: 
The forces, Fsliding, that tend to induce sliding are the sum of the following: 
Shear loads from bearing pads, V  (Table B3-1) 
Active earth pressure load, PA  (Table B3-2) 
Horizontal earth load from live load surcharge, PLS  (Table B3-2) 
Analyzing per m of the abutment wall, Fsliding is 
m/kN9.127
m/kN02.16m/kN96.69m25/kN1047
PPL/VF LSAfsliding
=
++=
++=
 
The force, FR, available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The vertical force, Pv, computed above includes the self-weight of the footing, W.  The live load 
should not be included in this calculation.  Thus the factor of safety FS against sliding is 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
B - 59 

8.2
m/kN9.127
m/kN3.356
m/kN9.127
)m25/kN1538m/kN3.518(78.0
=
=
−=
 
Again, the 25 percent overstress allowance could be applied, but since FS > 1.5, this is not 
necessary.   (OK) 
Step 11c – Check overturning, bearing pressure, and sliding without the bridge loading 
from the girders: 
Consider the loads of abutment components only, without the horizontal earth load from live 
load surcharge, PLS.  Note that this condition would not occur in the consideration of Group IV 
loads because the superstructure must be in place for the temputerature and shrinkage loads to 
be applied to the footing.  This check is normally done when considering Group I loads but is 
included here for completeness.   
Check overturning (eccentricity) for Bf = 3.2 m: 
Referring to Step 11b above and Table B3-2, the following are obtained without the contribution 
from PLS. 
m/mkN3.357m/mkN97.41m/mkN3.315M
m/kN6.229P
abuttoe
abutv
⋅=⋅+⋅=
=
 
The arm of the resultant is 
m56.1
)m/kN6.229/()m/mkN3.357(
P/Marm abutvabuttoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is 
m04.0
m56.1m6.1
m56.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
For stability, the eccentricity should be less than one-sixth the footing width: 
m53.06/m2.36/Bm04.0e fy ==<=  (OK) 
 
B - 60 

Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
m12.3
)m04.0)(2(m2.3
e2BB yff
=
−=
−=′
 
kPa6.73
)m12.3/()m/kN6.229(
B/Pq fabutv
=
=
′=
 
From Figure B3-4, the allowable bearing pressure for B′f = 3.12 m to limit settlement to less than 
35 mm is about 
kPa235qall =  
The applied bearing stress is smaller than the allowable value.  (OK) 
Check sliding: 
The force, Fsliding, that tends to induce sliding consists only of the active earth pressure load, PA  
(Table B3-2): 
m/kN96.69PF Asliding ==  
The force FR available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The factor of safety FS against sliding is: 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
6.2
m/kN96.69
m/kN4.179
m/kN96.69
)m/kN6.229(78.0
=
=
=
 
This should be > 1.5.    (OK) 
 
Step 12 – Complete structural design of the footing: 
The structural engineer completes this step. 
B - 61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank)
B - 62 

EXAMPLE 4: FULL-HEIGHT BRIDGE ABUTMENT WITH LATERAL EARTH PRESSURE 
Given: 
• Subsurface profile at the abutment is shown in Figure B4-1. 
• Geometry of the abutment is shown in Figure B4-2. 
• Abutment stem is located Bf/3 from the footing toe. 
• Tstem = 1.0 m, TGS = 0.5 m, and Tf = 0.9 m. 
• The height of the abutment, Habut, is 8.5 m, and the length is 25 m. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 25 mm (1.0 in). 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Service Load Design, Group I loads (allowable stress design 
method), considering both the settlement and bearing capacity.  Check for overturning 
and sliding.  
 
Boring B-1
Unit 1a:
Well-graded sand
Unit 2:
Shale
14
18
25
28
25
37
>50
>50
SPT N-value
g =19.6 kN/m3
1.5 m
1.5 m
g =23.5 kN/m3
RQD = 80%
g =19.6 kN/m333
4.5 m
Unit 1b:
Well-graded sand
(saturated)
Fo oting
Habu t
Bf
Backfill
Tf
Stem
and
Girder
Seat
Tstem
TGS Super structure
Dtoe
Figure B4-1: Subsurface Profile Figure B4-2: Abutment Geometry 
B - 63 

Solution: 
The solution can be obtained by following the step-by-step process shown in Figure 6-1, Design 
Process Flow Chart. 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:  
The structural, hydraulics and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required 
design information is provided in the problem-given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
The structural engineer has calculated the following values for loading along the abutment wall: 
Loads at base of the superstructure (applied through the bearings at the girder seat) are 
summarized on Table B4-1. 
TABLE B4-1: LOADS AT SUPERSTRUCTURE BASE 
Load 
Axial, P 
(kN/m) 
Shear, V 
(kN/m) 
Dead load (D) 227 41.9 
Live load (L) 61.6 0 
 
The shear load shown in Table B4-1 is the shear transferred through the bearings due to 
temperature, shrinkage and rib shortening.  Under Group I loads, the load factor for this shear 
component is zero and will therefore not be included in the design loads for this example. 
Final Service Load Design Loads for Group I: 
The general equation is (refer to Example B-1 for discussion of variables): 
)]ICE()EQ(
)TSR()LF()WL()W()SF(
B)E()CF(ILD P
ICEEQ
RLWLWS
BECLDI
β+β+
++β+β+β+ β+β +
 )( β+β+β + )+( β + )(β[ γ=
 
(AASHTO, 1996, 
Eqn. 3-10)
This reduces to the following for the loads under consideration for Load Group I in this example: 
)]( β + )(β[ γ= LD P LDI  
B - 64 

So the factored loads are as follows: 
Axial Loads: 
m/kN
m/kNm/kN
LDI
289
6.61227
LD P
 =
)]( 1.0 + )( [1.0 1.0 =
)]( β + )(β[ γ=
 
Shear: 
kN/m
kN/m
D
9.41
)](41.9 [1.0 1.0 
)]D([   V
=
=
βγ=
 
Step 6 – Conduct field exploration and laboratory testing:  
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in drawing at pier location, Figure B4-
1.  Laboratory testing was limited to soil classifications and moisture content due to the granular 
nature of the soils encountered in the boring.  The foundation design will be based largely on 
design parameters correlated to the soil classifications and the SPT N-values.  Compute the 
initial vertical effective stresses at the midpoint of each layer: 
Layer 1a: 
kPa1.44)6.19(m25.2' 3m
kN
a1v ==σ  
Layer 1b: 
kPa6.95)8.9(m75.0)6.19(m25.5' 3m
kN
3m
kN
b1v =−=σ  
The effective stress diagram for the profile at the abutment is plotted in Figure B4-3. 
Step 7 – Calculate allowable bearing capacity:   
The geotechnical engineer will calculate the limiting allowable bearing capacity, considering 
both the potential for bearing capacity failure (Section 5.2) and settlement (Section 5.3). 
Calculate Ultimate Bearing Capacity: 
The general equation for bearing capacity is: 
γγγγγ++= bsCNB5.0dbsCqN  bscNq WfqqqqWqcccult  (Eqn. 5-14) 
B - 65 

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
Depth (m)
25 5007 5
u
Vertical Stress (kPa)
44.1
10395.6
Unit 1a
Unit 1b
Unit 2 σVoσ'Vo
100 125 150
 
Figure B4-3:  Effective Stress Diagram 
The first term goes to zero since the foundation materials are granular and cohesionless, so the 
cohesion term, c, is zero. 
The footing length (Lf) is 25 m.  For footing widths (Bf) less than 5 m, the ratio of footing length, 
Lf, to width is greater than 5.  This footing classifies as a strip footing, and the shape factors 
should be set equal to 1.0: 
0.1ss q ==γ  (Table 5-2) 
Since this footing will be level, there is no effect of inclination of the base, so: 
0.1bb q ==γ  (Table 5-5) 
Calculate the effect of the footing embedment, q.  Assuming a 0.9-m-thick footing and 0.6-m 
cover, Df = 1.5 m: 
In this case, q is only a function of the depth of bearing. 
fov D''q γ=σ=  where: 3mbulk 6.19'= kN=γγ  
() m5.1)6.19(q 3m
kN=  
kPa4.29q =  
B - 66 

Since the ratio of the footing depth, Df, to the footing width, Bf, will be less than one, the 
correction factor to account for shearing resistance of the material above the bearing elevation, 
dq, should be set equal to 1.0: 
0.1dq =  (Table 5-4) 
Check ground water effect: 
Depth of ground water table below the bearing depth: 
Df = Depth of footing = 1.5 m Assumes a 0.9-m-thick footing and 0.6-m 
cover 
Dw = Depth of ground water below the ground surface = 4.5 m 
Conservatively estimate the footing width for ground water correction factors 
with an upper bound value of Bf = 6 m. 
Calculate ground water correction factors, CWγ and CWq: 
0.1DB5.1
D5.05.0C
ff
W
W ≤





++=γ   (Eqn. 5-9) 
7.05.1)6(5.1
5.45.05.0CW =





++=γ   
0.1D
D5.05.0C
f
W
qW ≤




+=   (Eqn. 5-10) 
0.25.1
5.45.05.0C qW =



+=  ;  Use CWq = 1.0 
A design friction angle associated with Unit 1a is needed to calculate the bearing capacity 
factors.  From Figure B4-1, the average uncorrected SPT N-value for this unit is 22.  From 
Figure B4-3, the average vertical effective stress in Unit 1 is 44.1 kPa (about 0.9 ksf).  Entering 
Figure 4-1 with a blowcount of 22 and a vertical effective stress of 0.9 ksf, a relative density, DR, 
of about 85 percent is read.  Entering Figure 4-2 with this relative density for well-graded sand 
(Unified Soil Classification ‘SW’), a friction angle of 38 degrees is selected for computing 
bearing capacity.   
From Table 5-1, the bearing capacity factors, Nγ and Nq, are 78.0 and 48.9, respectively, for a 
friction angle of 38 degrees.  So the equation for bearing capacity is: 
B - 67 

fult
f
ult
B535kPa1438q
0)7)(1.0)(1.)(78.0)(0.)(B (19.6 0.5
)(1.0))(1.0)(1.0(48.9)(1.0 kPa 29.4  = q 
3m
kN
+=
+  
Incorporating a factor of safety of 3.0: 
kPaB178479q
0.3)kPaB5351438(q
0.3qq
fall
fall
ultall
+=
÷+=
÷=
 
Estimate Footing Settlement: 
First, estimate the settlement in the sand layers, 1a and 1b, assuming that settlement in the shale, 
Layer 2, will be negligible.  Calculate stress increase at the midpoint of each soil layer using the 
2-on-1 stress distribution method for various footing widths – say, Bf = 3.0, 4.3, 5.5 and 6.7 m: 
)ZB/(Bq ffV +=σ∆  (for strip footing) (Figure 5-12) 
Layer 1a with midpoint of layer @ Z = 1.5 m below base of footing: 
67.0)5.10.3/(0.3q
a1V =+=σ∆  
Layer 1b with midpoint of layer @ Z = 3.75 m below base of footing: 
44.0)75.30.3/(0.3q
b1V =+=σ∆  
Perform similar calculations for Bf = 3.0, 4.3, 5.5 and 6.7 m, then tabulate as shown in Table  
B4-2. 
TABLE B4-2: STRESS INCREASE WITH DEPTH 
AS FUNCTION OF FOOTING WIDTH 
Stress Increase, ∆σv 
Soil Layer 
Depth 
Range (m) Bf = 3.0 m Bf = 4.3 m Bf = 5.5 m Bf = 6.7 m 
1a 1.5 – 4.5 0.67q 0.74q 0.79q 0.82q 
1b 4.5 – 6.0 0.44q 0.53q 0.59q 0.64q 
 
B - 68 

Determine stress applied by footing to generate 25 mm of settlement for the same range of 
footing widths, Bf = 3.0, 4.3, 5.5 and 6.7 m, using the Hough method: 
General equation: 
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH oo vvvo σσ∆+σ=∆  (Eqn. 5-24) 
Correct SPT blowcounts to account for overburden pressure, N′, for each layer, and enter Figure 
5-19 to obtain bearing capacity factor, C′: 
Layer 1a: 
Navg = 22 
N′/N = 1.47  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 32 
C′ = 108   (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded sand and gravel) 
Layer 1b: 
Navg = 35 
N′/N = 1.0  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 35 
C′ = 115  (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded sand and gravel) 
Calculate settlement in each layer and sum the settlements to obtain the total settlement under a 
range of applied stresses of q = 240, 290 and 335 kPa and a range of footing widths from 3.0 to 
6.7 m: 
Layer 1a: 
mm16m0160.0H
)]kPa8.58/))kPa240(67.0kPa8.58log[()108/1(m3H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
a1
a1
ovvova1a1
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
Layer 1b: 
mm4m004.0H
)]kPa6.95/))kPa240(44.0kPa6.95log[()115/1(m5.1H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
b1
b1
ovvovb1b1
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm20mm4mm16Hi =+=∑ ∆  
Repeat and tabulate for various footing widths and applied stresses (a spreadsheet or other 
computer tool can make these calculations rapidly): 
B - 69 

TABLE B4-3: SETTLEMENT AS A FUNCTION OF 
APPLIED STRESS AND FOOTING WIDTH 
Settlement (mm) 
Applied Stress (kPa) Bf = 3.0 m Bf = 4.3 m Bf = 5.5 m Bf = 6.7 m 
240 20 22 23 23 
290 22 24 25 26 
335 24 26 27 28 
 
Check the estimated settlement in the shale, Layer 2, to verify that this settlement is negligible.   
For settlement analysis, the shale can be modeled as elastic half-space.  From elastic theory: 
IRE
2
fVd
v E
)1(BC
α
ν−σ∆=δ   (Eqn. 5-36) 
15.032.1)RQD(0231.0E ≥−=α   (Eqn. 5-37) 
From Table 5-12 for a rectangle with L/B ratio of 5, Cd = 1.83.  For a shale with RQD = 80%, ν 
= 0.14 and EIR = 9.8 x 106 kPa, from Tables 5-13 and 5-14.  For a conservative footing width of 
5.5 m and a bearing pressure of 290 kPa:  
m10m5.1m0.6m5.5DZBB ff =−+=−+=  
kPa159)m10/m5.5(kPa290)B/B(q fV ===σ∆  
53.032.1)80(0231.0E =−=α  
mm5.0m0005.0)kPa9800000)(53.0(
)14.01)(m10)(kPa159)(83.1( 2
v ==−=δ  
This settlement is negligible. 
Compare the values in Table B4-3 to allowable bearing capacities at the same footing widths 
relative to shear failure.  Recall that the water table correction factor was conservatively 
computed near the upper bound of footing widths at Bf = 6 m.  This would be revisited only if 
bearing capacity failure is found to limit the allowable bearing capacity. 
For Bf = 3.0 m: 
kPa1013kPa)m0.3(178479qall =+=  >> 335 kPa (with 24 mm settlement) 
B - 70 

For Bf = 4.3 m: 
kPa1244kPa)m3.4(178479qall =+=  >> 290 kPa (with 24 mm settlement) 
For Bf = 5.5 m: 
kPa1458kPa)m5.5(178479qall =+=   >> 290 kPa (with 25 mm settlement) 
For Bf = 6.7 m: 
kPa1672kPa)m7.6(178479qall =+=   >> 240 kPa (with 23 mm settlement) 
Settlement will therefore limit the allowable bearing capacity for the design of this footing.  
Interpolating the values in Table B4-3, find ranges of footing widths that will limit settlement to 
25 mm or less at allowable bearing capacities of 240, 290 and 335 kPa: 
TABLE B4-4: SETTLEMENT-LIMITED 
ALLOWABLE BEARING CAPACITIES 
Allowable Bearing Capacity 
(kPa) 
Range of Footing Widths That Will 
Limit Settlement to ≤ 25 mm 
335 ≤ 3.0 m 
290 3.0 to 5.5 m 
240 5.5 to 6.7 m 
 
The geotechnical engineer should provide this table to the structural designer for sizing of the 
footing. 
Step 8 – Calculate sliding and passive soil resistance: 
The geotechnical engineer has recommended that the footing be cast against the firm, 
undisturbed soil of Unit 1a.  The friction angle of 38 degrees selected in Step 7 will be used to 
compute sliding resistance. 
The general equation for sliding resistance is: 
FR = (W + Pv) tan δ (Eqn. 5-38) 
The second term goes to zero since we are founding the footing on a cohesionless soil unit.  For a 
concrete footing cast against the ground, δ = φ, so the ultimate sliding resistance is: 
)PW(78.038tan)PW(F vvR +=°+=  
Since the sliding resistance will develop at strain levels much lower than those needed to develop 
passive pressures against the side of the footing, passive pressure will be ignored unless it is 
B - 71 

found that sliding resistance governs the design of the footing.  The geotechnical engineer should 
provide this equation and the assumptions regarding use of passive pressures to the structural 
engineer for checking the footing’s resistance to sliding. 
Step 9 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The global stability of the abutment was checked using Bishop’s simplified method of slices 
using the slope stability computer program XSTABLTM.  For this analysis, the actual footing was 
modeled as a very strong material, thus forcing the critical failure surface behind the heel of the 
footing (i.e., failure surfaces that passed through the footing were not permitted).  The output is 
shown in Figure B4-4.   
The calculated factor of safety for the specified surface was 2.6, which is larger than 1.5.  (OK)  
Step 10a – Size the footing: 
The footing should be designed based on three loading conditions:  (1) Intermediate Construction 
Step 1, after construction and backfill of the abutment and before erection of the superstructure 
(Figure B4-5); (2) Intermediate Construction Step 2, after erection of the superstructure and 
before live loads are applied (Figure B4-6); and (3) Final Loading Conditions (Figure B4-7). 
 
Structural fill
(Well-graded silty
SAND & GRAVEL)
FS=2.6
Well-graded
SAND
SHALE
Live  load  surcharge
 
Figure B4-4: Global Stability Analysis Results 
 
B - 72 

H /  3
Ac tive Ea rth
Pressure, pa
PA
Wf
Wtoe
Wh Wstem
 
Figure B4-5: Intermediate Construction Step 1 Loading Conditions 
Perform Steps 10 and 11 for the first intermediate construction step loading conditions: 
Try a 5.2-m footing width:   
Given that the superstructure will be erected before the girder seat is constructed, assume that the 
top of the backfill is at the base of the girder seat.  The height of the girder seat is approximately 
1.8 m. 
Calculate earth pressures and weights: 
2
aA HK)2/1(P γ=  (Eqn. 6-1) 
)2/'45(tanK 2
a φ−=   (Eqn. 6-3) 
24.0)2/3845(tanK 2
a =−=  
kN2
3m
kN
A 106)m8.1m5.8)(6.19)(24.0)(2/1(P =−=  
B - 73 

AASHTO recommends using a minimum Ka of 0.3.  However, because this material will be a 
specified compacted select granular material, we will use the calculated Ka value of 0.24 for 
design. 
kN
3m
kN
stem 136)5.23)(m9.0m8.1m5.8)(m0.1(W =−−=  assum e 3m
kN
concrete 5.23=γ  
kN
3m
kN
f 110)5.23)(m9.0)(m2.5(W ==  
kN
h 338)6.19)(m9.0m8.1m5.8)(m5.03
2m2.5(W 3m
kN =−−−



=  
kN
toe 5.14)6.19)(m6.0)(m5.03
1m2.5(W 3m
kN =−



=  
Calculate moment arms about toe: 
m73.13/m2.5armstem ==  
m6.22/m2.5armf ==  
m72.3]m5.0)3/m2.5[(m2.5(5.0armh =++=  
m62.0)m5.03/m2.5(5.0armtoe =−=  
m23.23/)m8.1m5.8(arm AP =−=  
Calculate eccentricity: 
)P/M()2/B(e Rtoef −=  
kNkNkNkNkN
R
toehfstemvR
5995.14338110136P
WWWWPWP
=+++=
+++=+=
 
mkNmkNmkN
toe
kN
kNkNkNkN
toe
APAtoetoehhffstemstemtoe
15512361787M
)m23.2)(106(
)m62.0)(5.14()m72.3)(338()m6.2)(110()m73.1)(136(M
)arm(P)arm(W)arm(W)arm(W)arm(WM
−−− =−=
−
+++=
−+++=
 
m01.0)599/1551()2/m2.5(e kNmkN =−= −  
B - 74 

Calculate effective footing dimensions: 
e2BB ff −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m18.5)m01.0(2m2.5Bf =−=′  
Check allowable bearing stress for effective footing area: 
kPa11618.5599BPq kN
fapplied =÷=′÷=  
This is less than qall = 290 kPa for footings between 3.0 and 5.5 m wide, according to Table B4-
4, to limit settlement to less than 25 mm. (OK) 
Step 11a – Check overturning and sliding: 
Overturning will be acceptable if eccentricity in any direction is less than one-sixth the footing 
dimension in that direction. 
01.0em87.0)m2.5(6
1B6
1
f =>==   (OK) 
The loads resisting sliding are: 
kN
Rv 599PPW ==+  
The force, Fsliding, that tends to induce sliding consists only of the active earth pressure load, PA: 
kN106
PF Asliding
=
=
 
The force, FR, available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The factor of safety FS against sliding is 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
4.4
kN106
kN467
kN106
)kN599(78.0
=
=
=
 
B - 75 

The factor of safety should be > 1.5.   (OK) 
Repeat Steps 10 and 11 for the second intermediate construction step loading conditions as 
shown in Figure B4-6: 
H / 3
Active Earth
Pressure, pa
PA
Wf
Wtoe
Wh
PV
V
Wstem
 
Figure B4-6: Intermediate Construction Step 2 Loading Conditions 
Step 10b – Size the footing: 
For a 5.2-m footing width:   
Calculate earth pressures and weights: 
2
aA HK2
1P γ=  (Eqn. 6-1) 
)2/'45(tanK 2
a φ−=  (Eqn. 6-3) 
B - 76 

24.0)2/3845(tanK 2
a =−=  
kN2
A 170)m5.8)(6.19)(24.0(2
1P 3m
kN ==  
kN
3m
kN
stem 157)5.23)](m8.1)(m5.0()m9.0m5.8)(m0.1[(W =−−=        
kN
3m
kN
f 110)5.23)(m9.0)(m2.5(W ==  
kN
h 442)6.19)(m9.0m5.8)(m5.03
2m2.5(W 3m
kN =−−



=  
kN
toe 5.14)6.19)(m6.0)(m5.03
1m2.5(W 3m
kN =−



=  
Calculate moment arms about toe: 
m77.1
)m5.0)(m8.1()m1)(m9.0m5.8(
)m5.0)(m8.1](m25.0)3/m2.5[()m1)(m8.1m9.0m5.8)(3/m2.5(armstem
=
−−
++−−=
 
m6.22/m2.5armf ==  
m72.3]m5.0)3/m2.5[(m2.5(5.0armh =++=  
m62.0)m5.03/m2.5(5.0armtoe =−=  
m48.1)m25.03/m2.5(arm vP =−=  
m83.23/m5.8arm AP ==  
m7.6m8.1m5.8armv =−=  
Calculate eccentricity: 
)P/M()2/B(e Rtoef −=  
kNkNkNkNkNkN
R
vtoehfstemvR
9512275.14442110157P
PWWWWPWP
=++++=
++++=+=
 
B - 77 

mkNmkNmkN
toe
kNkNkN
kNkNkNkN
toe
VAPA
vPvtoetoehhffstemstemtoe
17917622553M
)m7.6)(9.41()m83.2)(170()m48.1)(227(
)m62.0)(5.14()m72.3)(442()m6.2)(110()m77.1)(157(M
)arm(V)arm(P
)arm(P)arm(W)arm(W)arm(W)arm(WM
−−− =−=
−−+
+++=
−−
++++=
 
m72.0)951/1791()2/m2.5(e kNmkN =−= −  
Calculate effective footing dimensions: 
e2BB ff −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m76.3)m72.0(2m2.5Bf =−=′  
Check allowable bearing stress for effective footing area: 
kPa253m76.3951BPq kN
fapplied =÷=′÷=  
This is less than qall = 290 kPa for footings between 3.0 and 5.5 m wide, according to 
Table B4-4, to limit settlement to less than 25 mm.  (OK) 
Step 11b – Check overturning and sliding: 
Overturning will be acceptable if eccentricity in any direction is less than 1/6 the footing 
dimension in that direction. 
72.0em87.0)m2.5(6
1B6
1
f =>==   (OK) 
The loads resisting sliding are: 
kN
Rv 951PPW ==+  
The force, Fsliding, that tends to induce sliding consists of the active earth pressure load, PA and 
the shear load, V (Table B4-1): 
kN212
kN9.41kN170
VPF Asliding
=
+=
+=
 
B - 78 

The force, FR, available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The factor of safety FS against sliding is 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
5.3
m/kN212
m/kN742
m/kN212
)m/kN951(78.0
=
=
=
 
The factor of safety should be > 1.5.  (OK) 
Repeat Steps 10 and 11 for the final loading conditions: 
H / 3
H / 2
Active Earth
Pressure, pa
Traffic
Surcharge, pLS
PA
Wf
Wh
PV
V
Wstem
 
Figure B4-7: Final Loading Conditions 
B - 79 

Step 10c – Size the footing: 
For a 5.2-m footing width:   
From Step 10b: 
kN
LS
abutLSaLS
0.24)m5.8)(m6.0)(6.19)(24.0(P
HHKP
3m
kN ==
γ=
 
m25.42/m5.8arm LSP ==  
Calculate eccentricity: 
)P/M()2/B(e Rtoef −=  
kNkNkNkNkNkNkN
R
vtoehfstemvR
10136.612275.14442110157P
PWWWWPWP
=+++++=
++++=+=
 
mkNmkNmkN
toe
kNkNkNkNkN
kNkNkNkN
toe
VLSLSPA
Pvtoetoehhffstemstemtoe
17818642645M
)m7.6)(9.41()m25.4)(0.24()m83.2)(170()m48.1)(6.61227(
)m62.0)(5.14()m72.3)(442()m6.2)(110()m77.1)(157(M
)arm(V)arm(P)arm(P
)arm(P)arm(W)arm(W)arm(W)arm(WM
A
v
−−− =−=
−−−++
+++=
−−−
++++=
 
m84.0)1013/1781()2/m2.5(e kNmkN =−= −  
Calculate effective footing dimensions: 
e2BB ff −=′  (Eqn. 6-6) 
m52.3)m84.0(2m2.5Bf =−=′  
Check allowable bearing stress for effective footing area: 
Pa288m52.31013BPq kN
fapplied =÷=′÷=  
This is less than qall = 290 kPa for footings between 3.0 and 5.5 m wide, according to Table B4-
4, to limit settlement to less than 25 mm.  (OK) 
B - 80 

Step 11c – Check overturning and sliding: 
Overturning will be acceptable if eccentricity in any direction is less than one-sixth the footing 
dimension in that direction. 
OK84.0em87.0)m2.5(6
1B6
1
f =>==  
The loads resisting sliding are: 
kN
Rv 1013PPW ==+  
The force, Fsliding, that tends to induce sliding consists of the active earth pressure load, PA and 
the shear load, V (Table B3-2): 
kN212
kN9.41kN170
VPF Asliding
=
+=
+=
 
The force FR available to resist sliding (from Step 8) is 
)PW(78.0F vR +=  
The factor of safety FS against sliding is 
FSsliding = 5.1F
F
sliding
R ≥  (Eqn. 5-40) 
7.3
m/kN212
m/kN790
m/kN212
)m/kN1013(78.0
=
=
=
 
This should be > 1.5.  (OK) 
 
Step 12 – Complete structural design of footing: 
The structural engineer completes this step. 
B - 81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally blank)
B - 82 

EXAMPLE 5: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON IN-SITU ROCK 
Given: 
• Subsurface profile at the interior bridge pier is shown in Figure B5-1. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• Tolerable settlement is 38 mm (1.5 in). 
• The direction conventions are shown in Figure B5-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Service Load Design, Group VII (seismic) loads (allowable 
stress design method), considering both the settlement and bearing capacity.  Check for 
overturning and sliding. 
 
 
Boring  B-1
?
Unit 1 :
Silty Sand
Unit 2 :
Granite Bedrock
6
7
18
Column Di ameter,
D = 0.6 m
SPT N-value
g =19.6 kN/m3
1.2 m
RQD =100%
Figure B5-1:  Subsurface Profile 
 
 
 
 
B - 83 

Area of Column, Acol
Lf
Bf
Df
Z - Transverse
Direction of Bridge
Y - Longitudinal
Direction of Bridge
P
Mz - Moment About
Z-Axis due to
Longitudinal Loading
My - Moment About
Y-Axis due to
Transverse Loading
Soil
Footing
 
Figure B5-2:  Sign Conventions and Loading Directions 
Solution: 
The solution can be obtained by following the step-by-step process shown in Figure 6-1, Design 
Process Flow Chart. 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:  
The structural, hydraulics and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required 
design information is provided in the problem given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
The structural engineer has provided the loads applied at the base of the column as shown in 
Table B5-1. 
B - 84 

TABLE B5-1: LOADS AT COLUMN BASE 
Load 
Axial, P 
(kN) 
Shear, V 
(kN) 
Moment, MZ 
(kN-m) 
Moment, MY 
(kN-m) 
Deadload (D) 6400 167 211 748 
Live load (L) 1670 42 409 196.5 
Impact (I) 315 8 77 37 
Wind on 
Structure (W) 
884 49 89 226 
Wind on Live 
Load (WL) 
18 4 7 26 
Earthquake (EQ) 1671 804 1675 5546 
 
Service Load Design Loads for Group VII: 
The general equation is (refer to Example B-1 for discussion of variables): 
)]ICE()EQ(
)TSR()LF()WL()W()SF(
B)E()CF(ILD P
ICEEQ
RLWLWS
BECLDI
β+β+
++β+β+β+ β+β +
 )( β+β+β + )+( β + )(β[ γ=
 
(AASHTO, 1996, 
Eqn. 3-10)
Because the coefficients, β , for live load (L), impact (I), wind (W) and wind on live load (WL) 
are all zero for Load Group VII, this reduces to the following: 
] + )(  + )(  + (  + )([ = (EQ)βSFβBβE)βDβ γP EQSBEDVII  
Also, because there are no earth (E), buoyancy (B) or stream force (SF) loads in Table B5-1, the 
equation further reduces to:  
] +  )([ = (EQ)βDβ γP EQDVII  
The axial load due to earthquake can act in either the positive or negative direction.  For 
checking bearing stress, the load will be considered to act downward.  For checking overturning 
(eccentricity), the load will be considered to act upward.  So the factored loads are as follows: 
Axial loads for checking bearing stress: 
kN
kNkN
EQDv
8071
16711.064000101
(EQ)βDβ γP bearing
 =
)](  + )( .[ . =
]  + )([ =
 
B - 85 

Axial loads for checking overturning: 
kN
kNkN
EQDv
4729
16711.064000101
(EQ)βDβ γP OT
 =
)](−  + )( .[ . =
] + )([ =
 
Shear: 
kN
kNkN
EQD
971
8041.01670101
(EQ)βDβ γV
=
)]( + )( .[ . =
] + )([ =
 
Moment about the Z-axis: 
m-kN
m-kNm-kN
EQDZ
1886 
)](1675 1.0   )(211 [1.0 1.0 
(EQ)βDβ γM
=
+=
]  + )([ =
 
Moment about the Y-axis: 
m-kN
m-kNm-kN
EQDY
6294 
)](5546 1.0   ) (748 [1.0 1.0 
(EQ)βDβ γM
=
+=
] + )([ =
 
Step 6 – Conduct field exploration and laboratory testing:  
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in Figure B5-1.  The information 
indicates that the granite bedrock is hard, sound rock with discontinuities less than 2 mm wide, 
spaced more than 6 m apart.  Granite RQD = 100 percent. 
Step 7 – Calculate allowable bearing capacity:   
Allowable bearing capacities for footings on competent rock can be determined using 
presumptive bearing pressures.  From Table 5-7, the recommended allowable bearing capacity 
for sound granite is 7.7 MPa.  According to AASHTO (1996) Table 3.22.1A for earthquake 
loadings, the allowable bearing capacity can be increased by one-third, resulting in an overstress 
allowable bearing capacity under earthquake loads of 10.2 MPa; therefore, use qall = 10,200 kPa.   
In general practice, settlement is not checked for Group VII loads because seismic loads are 
transient and temporary in nature.  However, for completeness, we will check settlement in Step 
10 based on elastic theory for the actual footing dimensions and bearing stress. 
B - 86 

Step 8 – Calculate sliding and passive soil resistance: 
The geotechnical engineer has recommended that the footing be cast against unweathered granite 
rock in Unit 2.   
The general equation for sliding resistance is: 
FR = (W + Pv) tan δ (Eqn. 5-38) 
The second term goes to zero since we are not founding the footing on a cohesive soil unit.  For a 
concrete footing cast against the ground, assume an interface friction angle of δ = 35 degrees 
(Table 5-15, after NAVFAC (1986b)).  In reality, this is a very conservative assumption for mass 
concrete poured on a rough, monolithic rock surface.  However, sliding is not usually the 
controlling condition for interior bridge foundations, so we will use this conservative assumption 
unless it is found to control the design of the footing.  The ultimate sliding resistance is therefore: 
)P0.7(W)tan35P(WF vvsliding +=°+=  
Since the sliding resistance will develop at strain levels much lower than those needed to develop 
passive pressures against the side of the footing, passive pressure will be ignored unless it is 
found that sliding resistance governs the design of the footing.  The geotechnical engineer should 
provide this equation and the assumptions regarding use of passive pressures to the structural 
engineer for checking the footing’s resistance to sliding. 
Step 9 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The geotechnical engineer has determined that since this is an interior pier with level ground 
conditions global stability is not a concern. 
Step 10 – Size the footing: 
The moments applied to the footing will create large eccentric loadings.  First determine the 
minimum effective footing area necessary to provide sufficient bearing capacity.  Then size the 
footing to account for the eccentric loading applied by the moment.   
The minimum effective footing area is calculated as follows using the maximum axial load: 
2kN
allv
m0.79kPa10,2008071A
qPA bearing
=÷=′
÷=′
 
Due to the large differences in applied moments, make the footing rectangular to optimize the 
size.  The relative dimensions of the footing should be the same as the relative magnitudes of the 
moments.   
)L(3.06294
1886)L(M
M)L(B ff
Y
Zff ′=′=′=′  
B - 87 

Determine the effective footing dimensions: 
m0.490.3(1.62m))L0.3(B
m1.620.3
0.79m 0.3
AL
LL0.3A
LBA
ff
2
f
ff
ff
==′=′
==′=′
′×′=′
′×′=′
 
The actual footing dimensions are influenced by the eccentricity.  Calculate the eccentricity 
using the minimum axial load. 
m0.39947291886e
PMe
kNmkN
y
vZy OT
=÷=
÷=
−  
m33.147296294e
PMe
kmkN
z
vYz OT
=÷=
÷=
−  
Determine the footing dimensions necessary to resist the moments by rearranging Equations 6-6 
and 6-7: 
m28.4m)2(1.33m1.622eLL zff =+=+′=  
m29.12(0.399m)0.49m2eBB yff =+=+′=  
Perform a quick check to ensure that overturning is also acceptable.  Overturning will be 
acceptable if eccentricity in any direction is less than one-fourth the footing dimension in that 
direction for footings on rock, as discussed in Section 6.4.1. 
m0.399em0.33m)(1.34
1B4
1
yf =<==  (not OK) 
m33.1em01.1m)(4.34
1L4
1
zf =<==  (not OK) 
Therefore, use a minimum footing width and length of 4 times ey and ez, respectively. 
m6.1m)(0.3994e4B yf ===  
m32.5m)(1.334e4L zf ===  
Therefore, a footing with dimensions Lf = 5.4 m by Bf = 1.6 m will be stable and adequate for 
bearing capacity.  Typically, the minimum footing width should be at least 3 column diameters 
B - 88 

[i.e., 3(0.6 m) = 1.8 m] to provide the required development length for the reinforcement of the 
column-footing connection.  The final dimensions of the footing will be controlled by the 
structural design of the footing, but the footing dimension should be no smaller than Lf = 5.4 m 
and Bf = 1.8 m. 
Check the assumption regarding settlement: 
Using elastic theory: 
IRE
2
fVd
v E
)1(BC
α
ν−σ∆=δ   (Eqn. 5-36) 
15.032.1)RQD(0231.0E ≥−=α   (Eqn. 5-37) 
From Table 5-12 for a rectangle with L/B ratio of 3, Cd = 1.78.  For a granite with RQD = 100%, 
ν = 0.2 and EIR = 52 x 106 kPa, from Tables 5-13 and 5-14.  The applied stress will be equal to 
the allowable bearing stress since the footing bears directly on the rock. 
99.032.1)100(0231.0E =−=α  
So: 
mm3.0m0003.0)kPa52000000)(99.0(
)20.01)(m1)(kPa10200)(78.1( 2
v ==−=δ  
This settlement is negligible. 
The design is acceptable for bearing capacity and settlement considerations. 
Step 11 – Check overturning and sliding: 
Overturning was already checked during the sizing of the footing in Step 10. 
The footing will be stable against sliding if: 
1.5F
FFS
sliding
R ≥=  
From Step 8: 
)P0.7(WF vR +=  
Calculate the weight of cover over the footing and the weight of the footing: 
The footing is bearing 1.2 m below grade and can be assumed to be 1 m thick. 
B - 89 

The area of the column is: 
22
col m28.0)m6.0(4A =π=  
The weight of the footing and the soil cover is then: 
kN2
cover
kN
ftg
0.37))](19.6m8(0.2m)(0.2m)m)(5.4m)(1.8[(0.2W
4.228)m)(23.5m)(5.4m)(1.8(1.0W
3m
kN
3m
kN
=−=
==
 
So, resistance to sliding is: 
)P0.7(WF OTvR +=  
kNkNkNkN
vcoverftgR
3496)4729370.7(228.4
)PW(W7.0F OT
=++=
++=
 
The forces acting to cause the footing to slide are only due to the shear force, V, so 
kN971VFsliding ==  
Then: 
6.3971
3496
F
FFS
sliding
R ===  
This should be greater than about 1.0 to 1.15 for seismic loads. (OK) 
 
Step 12 – Complete structural design of footing 
The structural engineer completes this step. 
 
B - 90 

APPENDIX C 
 
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN 
This appendix provides a discussion of the design of shallow foundations for bridges using Load 
and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) methodology, and is based on the AASHTO LRFD 
Bridge Design Specifications (1998).  Design examples B-1 and B-3 are re-worked using LRFD 
methods and principles.  The purpose of these examples is to show that designs completed using 
LRFD methodology are not radically different from those completed by SLD. 
It should be noted that these examples are intended to convey one approach and process 
that can lead to a satisfactory design of bridge support on a shallow foundation.  The 
examples should not be construed as representations of the only approach that can lead to a 
satisfactory design.  Also note that the examples only check one or, at most, a few specific 
load cases.  In practice, every complete design should consider all applicable load cases. 
EXAMPLE C-1: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON A SPREAD FOOTING FOUNDED IN NATIVE SOIL 
This example sizes the footing for an interior pier considering the LRFD Service I, Strength I 
and Extreme I limit states.  The loads and ground conditions are the same as used in Example B-
1. 
EXAMPLE C-2: STUB SEAT-TYPE ABUTMENT FOOTING IN COMPACTED STRUCTURAL FILL 
This example sizes an abutment footing considering the LRFD Service I and Strength I limit 
states.  The loads and ground conditions are the same as used in Example B-3. 
Note: Unless cited with a specific reference (e.g., AASHTO, 1996), the equation numbers in the 
examples refer to those in the main body of this Circular. 
C.1 INTRODUCTION 
This section compares and contrasts the differences and similarities of Load and Resistance 
Factor Design (LRFD) methodology with Service Load Design (SLD) and explains how the 
geotechnical engineer must modify the design recommendations to make them usable for the 
structural engineer.  It is not intended to provide comprehensive coverage on the background and 
application of LRFD to bridge design. 
The reader should keep in mind that the fundamental theories and procedures used to calculate 
bearing capacity and settlement for shallow foundations are not different between LRFD and 
SLD.  The differences come in the way the geotechnical engineer presents the design 
C - 1 

recommendations and the way the structural engineer compares them to the factored load 
combinations. 
Recall that the “Standard Specifications” (AASHTO, 1996) were based on Service Level Design 
(SLD).  In this design method, the stresses caused in members by design loads are compared to 
an allowable stress for the member.  The allowable stress is determined by taking the nominal 
strength of the material (e.g., yield stress for steel) and applying a factor of safety.  The 
allowable stress is also limited for serviceability considerations such as settlement.  The 
following equation demonstrates the basic principle of the SLD method: 
∑ = FS
RQ
n
i  (Eqn. C-1) 
where: Qi is an applied load or stress 
 R n is the resistance (e.g., strength or yield stress) of the member or material 
 FS is the applied factor of safety 
The allowable stress includes considerations for strength, fatigue, serviceability and settlement.  
The factors of safety used in the allowable stress method are derived from industry code writing 
groups such as ACI and AISC.  Factors of safety for geotechnical engineering are derived from 
industry practice and performance observation.  Typically, the factors of safety for structural 
materials are in the range of 1.7, while the geotechnical factors of safety for foundations are from 
2 to 3.  These factors of safety are not derived based on probability theory.  They are based on 
observation, full-scale tests, theory and judgment.  Factors of safety adopted in the design codes 
are then agreed upon by committee consensus. 
The allowable stress method has some limitations in that the variability in the strengths of the 
materials and the variability in the different loads are all combined into a single safety factor.  
For example, truck live loads have a much greater variability than the dead load of the structure, 
but a single factor of safety implies that the variability of all loads are similar. 
The goal of LRFD methodology is to statistically account for the variability of the individual 
loads and resistances computed for design.  Most of the AASHTO specification was calibrated 
based on the data available through NCHRP Project 12-33 (Nowak, 1992).  Because not much 
data existed for calibrating the foundation (geotechnical) portion of the specification, some of the 
resistance factors for foundations and most of the resistance factors for walls were back-fit to 
match the existing SLD levels of reliability.  The basic equation for the LRFD method is: 
∑ =ϕ≤γη rniii RRQ  (Eqn. C-2) 
where: ηi is a factor that includes the effects of ductility, redundancy and importance 
 γi is the load factor for a particular load 
 Q i is a service level load 
 ϕ is the resistance factor 
 R n is the nominal resistance 
 R r is the factored resistance 
C - 2 

Note that the load and resistance factors in the AASHTO (1998) LRFD Specification were 
calibrated with ηi equal to 1.0.  The use of ηi other than 1.0 will therefore result in factored loads 
that are not consistent with the calibration, and should be done with caution or in accordance 
with the policies and procedures of the owner agency. 
C.2 LIMIT STATES 
A “limit state,” as defined by the AASHTO 1998 specification, is a condition beyond which the 
bridge or component ceases to satisfy the provisions for which it was designed.  To meet the 
limit states applied to a design, the above equation must be satisfied for each limit state.  The 
limit states are described in Table C-1.  The descriptions of these limit states and the design 
conditions they consider can be compared with the load groups used in SLD (see Table 6-2 in the 
main text). 
TABLE C-1: LRFD LIMIT STATES 
Limit State Description 
Strength The structure is checked for enough strength and stability to resist the 
loads imparted on it. 
Strength I Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge without wind 
Strength II Load combination with permit vehicles using the bridge without wind 
Strength III Load combination with maximum winds and no vehicles 
Strength IV In this load case, large spans create large dead-to-live load effects.  This 
load case need be used only where the dead-to-live load ratio is above 
about 7.0. 
Strength V Load combination with normal vehicles using the bridge with wind 
Extreme Event Load combinations relating to ice load, collision by vessels and vehicles, 
and to certain hydraulic events and earthquakes, whose recurrence 
interval exceeds the design life of the structure.  The structure needs to 
survive these events.  Some of these events need to be checked in the 
scoured condition. 
Extreme Event I Load combination for seismic loading 
Extreme Event II Load combination relating to ice load, collision by vessels and vehicles, 
and certain hydraulic events 
Service This is a check so that crack widths, deflections and other conditions do 
not jeopardize the life of the structure. 
Service I Load combination with normal vehicles and wind 
Service II Load combination for slip-critical steel connections 
Service III Load combination to control cracks in prestressed concrete structures 
Fatigue Fatigue and fracture load combination using a special fatigue vehicle 
 
C - 3 

The AASHTO (1998) LRFD specification is very explicit regarding the different limit states that 
have to be considered in design.  The LRFD strength limit states are similar to the AASHTO 
(1996) “Standard Specifications” for factored Load Groups I through VI, and the extreme limit 
states are similar to the factored Load Groups VII through IX.  However, the “Standard 
Specifications” (AASHTO, 1996) do not include the explicit service (deformation) checks for all 
design elements that are included throughout the LRFD specifications (AASHTO, 1998). 
 SLD 
 
 
Deformations 
 
 
Capacity 
LRFD 
 
 
Service 
 
 
Strength 
 
C.3 LOADS AND LOAD COMBINATIONS 
The AASHTO LRFD specifications prescribe the procedures used to compute loads and detail 
how to factor and combine the loads for comparing to the factored resistance.  The load 
combinations and load factors per Table 3.4.1-1 (AASHTO, 1998) are shown in Table C-2. 
TABLE C-2: LRFD LOAD COMBINATIONS AND LOAD FACTORS (AASHTO, 1998) 
Load 
Combination 
DC 
DD 
DW 
LL 
IM
CE 
WA WS WL FR TU 
CR 
SH 
TG SE Use One of These at a Time 
 
Limit State 
EH 
EV 
ES 
BR 
PL 
LS 
EL 
       EQ IC CT CV 
Strength I 
(unless noted) 
γP 1.75 1.00 - - 1.00 0.50/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Strength II γP 1.35 1.00 - - 1.00 0.50/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Strength III γP - 1.00 1.40 - 1.00 0.50/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Strength IV 
EH, EV, ES, DW 
DC only 
 
γP 
1.50 
- 1.00 - - 1.00 0.50/1.20 - - - - - - 
Strength V γP 1.35 1.00 0.40 1.0 1.00 0.50/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Extreme Event I γP γEQ 1.00 - - 1.00 - - - 1.00 - - - 
Extreme Event II γP 0.50 1.00 - - 1.00 - - - - 1.00 1.00 1.00 
Service I 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.30 1.0 1.00 1.00/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Service II 1.00 1.30 1.00 - - 1.00 1.00/1.20 - - - - - - 
Service III 1.00 0.80 1.00 - - 1.00 1.00/1.20 γTG γSE - - - - 
Fatigue LL, IM 
& CE only 
- 0.75 - - - - - - - - - - - 
C - 4 

 
For permanent loads: 
DD = downdrag  
DC = dead load of structural components and 
nonstructural attachments 
DW = dead load of wearing surfaces and utilities 
EH = horizontal earth pressure load 
EL = accumulated locked-in effects resulting from 
the construction process (not usually 
important for foundation design) 
ES = earth surcharge load 
EV = vertical pressure from dead load of earth fill 
For transient loads: 
BR = vehicular braking force 
CE = vehicular centrifugal force 
CR = creep 
CT = vehicular collision force (not usually 
important for foundation design) 
CV = vessel collision force (only important over 
navigable waterways) 
 
EQ = earthquake 
FR = friction (usually applies only with respect to 
forces from bearing assemblies) 
IC = ice load 
IM = vehicular dynamic load allowance (This is 
zero for the buried portions of structures.  So 
for most foundations, this is zero.) 
LL = vehicular live load 
LS = live load surcharge 
PL = pedestrian live load 
SE = settlement 
SH = shrinkage 
TG = temperature gradient (not usually a factor for 
foundations) 
TU = uniform temperature 
WA = water load and stream pressure 
WL = wind on live load 
WS = wind load on structure 
Per the specification, the larger of the two load factor values for TU, SH and CR should be used 
for deformations, and the smaller values for all other effects. 
Table C-3 shows the load factors for permanent loads (γP) per Table 3.4.1-2 (AASHTO, 1998). 
TABLE C-3: LOAD FACTORS FOR PERMANENT LOADS 
 Load Factor - γP 
Type of Load Maximum Minimum 
DC:  Component and Attachment 1.25 0.90 
DD:  Downdrag 1.80 0.45 
DW:  Wearing Surfaces and Utilities 1.50 0.65 
EH:  Horizontal Earth Pressure 
• Active 
• At-Rest 
 
1.50 
1.35 
 
0.90 
0.90 
EL:  Locked-in Erection Stresses 1.00 1.00 
EV:  Vertical Earth Pressure 
• Retaining Walls and Abutments 
• Rigid Buried Structure 
• Rigid Frames 
• Flexible Buried Structures other 
than Metal Box Culverts 
• Flexible Metal Box Culverts 
 
1.35 
1.30 
1.35 
1.95 
 
1.50 
 
1.00 
0.90 
0.90 
0.90 
 
0.90 
ES:  Earth Surcharge 1.50 0.75 
 
C - 5 

γTG and γSE are to be determined on a project-by-project basis.  Traditionally, they are usually 
taken as zero for the design of open girders and multiple steel box girders.  However, the 
specification proposes to use 0.0 at the strength and extreme limit states, 1.0 at the service limit 
state without live load, and 0.5 at the service limit state when live load is considered. 
γEQ is a load factor applied to live load effects when considering earthquake loads and is 
supposed to be determined on a project specific basis.  Traditionally this has been taken as zero.  
However, commentary to the specification suggests that 0.5 may be more appropriate when 
considering the possibility of a partial live load combined with seismic loads. 
For foundation design not all of the above load cases will apply.  The following load cases will 
generally apply to the design of foundations: 
• Strength I 
• Strength II (although with the new live loading being applied, this load case may not be 
necessary) 
• Strength III 
• Strength IV (this will only control for long-span structures where creep, shrinkage and 
temperature effects become significant) 
• Strength V 
• Extreme I 
• Service I 
Note that maximum and minimum load factors can be applied for any given foundation.  
Usually, the maximum load factors will be used to find the maximum soil pressures, while the 
minimum load factors will be used to check stability of a foundation.   
Individual loads also have numerous different maximum and minimum effects.  A good example 
of this is live load (LL).  Live load effects on a foundation will include a loading case with 
maximum vertical load and two loading cases with maximum moments in the orthogonal 
directions.  These all need to be checked when sizing and designing a shallow foundation.  There 
are also configurations for which minimum live load effects can cause uplift at foundations.  
These also need to be included in the design of the foundation. 
C.3.1 Live Load Surcharge 
The live load surcharge under the LRFD methodology is also modeled as an equivalent soil 
surcharge behind the wall or abutment.  However, the equivalent height of soil to use in 
calculating the live load surcharge varies as a function of the height of the wall and can be 
computed according Table C-4.  The lateral load due to live load surcharge is then calculated and 
applied according to Section 6.3. 
C - 6 

TABLE C-4: LIVE LOAD SURCHARGE 
Wall Height (m) heq (m) 
1.5 1.2 
3.0 0.9 
6 or higher 0.6 
 
C.4.1 Active Lateral Earth Pressures 
Under LRFD methodology, the application of active lateral earth pressures on abutments and 
retaining walls is at four-tenths the height of the abutment (0.4 x Habut) to account for backfill 
compaction effects. 
C.4 GEOTECHNICAL DESIGN 
Computations of bearing capacity and settlement of shallow foundations under LRFD 
methodology use the same procedures and equations as used in SLD.  These are described in 
Chapter 5. 
C.4.1 Service Limit State Bearing Stress 
The service limit state checks in LRFD ensure that deflections and movements under normal 
bridge loads are within tolerable limits.  For shallow foundations, service limit state 
considerations will be controlled by settlement computations.  The procedures in Section 5.3 
should be used to estimate settlement of footings as a function of the effective footing width, B′f.  
This information can be plotted as the nominal bearing resistance for the service limit state on a 
graph, or tabulated, for use by the structural engineer in sizing the footing. 
C.4.2 Strength and Extreme Limit State Bearing Resistance 
For shallow foundations, the nominal bearing resistance at the strength and extreme limit states 
is usually taken as the ultimate bearing capacity computed using the procedures in Section 5.2.  It 
is generally convenient to plot or tabulate the computed values as a function of effective footing 
width, B′f.  The geotechnical engineer should also recommend the resistance factor to apply to 
the nominal bearing resistance for performing the strength limit state checks. 
It is not unusual for geotechnical engineers to initially feel uncomfortable with the magnitude of 
the ultimate bearing capacity that is computed.  These bearing capacities are generally much 
larger than the allowable bearing capacities associated with Service Load Design.  The 
geotechnical engineer should be aware that applying too much conservative judgment at this 
point could result in overconservative designs.  Good communication with the structural 
engineer will help prevent designs being unnecessarily controlled by the strength limit state due 
to an overly conservative nominal bearing resistance.  The geotechnical engineer should keep in 
mind that the load combinations in the strength limit state are multiplied by load factors that are 
larger than 1.0. 
C - 7 

Note that presumptive bearing capacities include combined consideration of settlement and 
bearing capacity.  For normally consolidated soils (e.g., not IGMs or rock), use of presumptive 
values for strength and extreme limit state checks will frequently result in grossly over-
conservative designs, since they are generally controlled by settlement, which is a service limit 
state consideration.  There is no rational approach to obtaining service and extreme limit state 
nominal bearing resistance.  Increasing the presumptive values with arbitrary factors for use in 
strength and extreme limit state design checks is unwise and could be unsafe. 
C.4.3 Resistance Factors 
Resistance factors for the service and extreme limit states are nearly always taken as 1.0.  
Resistance factors for the strength limit state are less than 1.0 and are a function of the method 
used to compute the nominal (ultimate) bearing capacity. 
Table C-5 presents the strength limit state resistance factors recommended by AASHTO for 
shallow foundations. 
C.4.5 Global Stability 
When the location of a shallow foundation can contribute to the instability of a slope, such as an 
abutment constructed in an approach fill, the overall, or global, stability of the slope should be 
checked.  It is important to note that limit equilibrium methods are by far the most expedient 
method for evaluating slope stability.  An important prerequisite of limit equilibrium methods is 
that the solutions are based on failure, or ultimate, stresses.  It is recommended that this be done 
at the Service I limit state using unfactored loads and resistances.  That is, the loads applied by 
the footing that are acting to destabilize the slope should be unfactored working loads.  Classic 
limit equilibrium methods, as described in Section 5.5, should be used to calculate the factor of 
safety of the slope.  All slopes supporting footings should have a global factor of safety of at 
least 1.5. 
C.5 SHALLOW FOUNDATION DESIGN 
The structural engineer will use the nominal bearing resistances provided by the geotechnical 
engineer to size the footing and perform all the necessary limit state checks. 
C.5.1 Sizing the Footing 
Since settlement considerations frequently control the size and design of shallow foundations, it 
is generally expedient to size the footing at the service limit state and then check to see that the 
nominal bearing resistances are below the factored resistance at the strength and extreme limit 
state. 
C.5.2 Bearing Stresses 
Once an initial sizing of the footing is made, all applicable limit states should be checked to 
ensure that the applied bearing stress is below the factored resistance at that limit state. 
C - 8 

TABLE C-5: RESISTANCE FACTORS FOR STRENGTH LIMIT  
STATE FOR SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS (MODIFIED  
AFTER TABLE 10.5.5-1, AASHTO, 1998) 
 
Method/Soil/Condition 
Resistance 
Factor 
Sand 
- Semiempirical procedure using SPT data 
- Semiempirical procedure using CPT data 
- Rational Method: 
--using ϕf estimated from SPT data 
--using ϕf estimated from CPT data 
 
0.45 
0.55 
 
0.35 
0.45 
Clay 
- Semiempirical procedure using CPT Data 
- Rational Method: 
--using shear resistance measured in lab 
tests 
--using shear resistance measured in field 
vane tests 
--using shear resistance estimated from CPT 
data 
 
0.50 
 
0.60 
 
0.60 
 
0.50 
Rock 
Semiempirical procedure, Carter and 
Kulhawy (1988) 
 
0.60 
Bearing Capacity  
Plate Load Test 0.55 
Precast concrete placed on sand 
--using ϕf estimated from SPT data 
--using ϕf estimated from CPT data 
 
0.90 
0.90 
Sliding  
Concrete cast-in-place on sand 
--using ϕf estimated from SPT data 
--using ϕf estimated from CPT data 
 
0.80 
0.80 
 ϕT Clay (where shear resistance is less than 0.5 
times normal pressure) 
--using shear resistance measured in lab 
tests 
--using shear resistance measured in field 
tests 
--using shear resistance estimated form CPT 
data 
Clay (where the resistance is greater than 0.5 
times normal pressure) 
Soil on soil 
 
 
0.85 
 
0.85 
 
0.80 
 
0.85 
 
1.0 
Passive Pressure ϕep Passive earth pressure component of sliding 
resistance 
0.50 
 
C - 9 

C.5.3 Eccentricity 
The check for overturning potential is also performed by determining the eccentricity of the 
resultant load under maximum overturning conditions.  This usually occurs using the minimum 
load factors for resisting loads.  The maximum eccentricity of the loads determined with the 
minimum load factors should be less than one-fourth of the corresponding footing dimension, B 
or L, on soil and less than three-eights of the corresponding footing dimension, B or L, on rock.  
Note that these permissible ranges differ from those used in Service Load Design. 
Eccentricity is computed using the procedure and equations in Section 6.4.   
C.5.4 Sliding 
Sliding of the footing is checked to make sure that lateral loads do not make the footing move.  
The lateral capacity of the footing due to lateral loads is: 
QR = ϕTQT+ϕepQep (Eqn. C-3, after AASHTO 1998 Eqn. 10.6.3.3-1) 
where: QR is the factored resistance 
 ϕT is the resistance factor for shear resistance between the footing base and the soil 
 Q T is the nominal shear resistance between soil and foundation 
 ϕep is the resistance factor for passive soil resistance 
 Q ep is the nominal passive resistance 
As in Service Load Design, it is customary to neglect or reduce the passive resistance for the 
same reasons discussed in Section 5.4. 
For cohesionless soils in which the concrete is cast against the soil: 
QT = Pv tan φ (Eqn. C-4, after AASHTO 1998 Eqn. 10.6.3.3-2) 
For cohesionless soils where the concrete is precast use: 
QT = Pv(0.8)tan φ (Eqn. C-5, after AASHTO 1998 Eqn. 10.6.3.3-2) 
where: QT  = Nominal sliding resistance 
 φ  = Internal friction angle of soil 
 P v  = Applied vertical force 
Note that these equations inherently account for the lower sliding resistance resulting from 
precast (formed) concrete.  The associated resistance factors in Table C-5 must therefore be used 
with these equations.  For a footing bearing directly on cohesive soils the sliding resistance is 
equal to the undrained shear strength of the soil or one-half the vertical stress, whichever is less. 
C.6 DESIGN PROCESS FLOW CHART 
The LRFD design process for a bridge supported on shallow foundations includes the steps 
shown in Table C-6 and in the LRFD design process flow chart, Figure C-1.
C - 10 

 
TABLE C-6: STEPS IN LRFD DESIGN PROCESS FOR BRIDGE  
SUPPORTED ON SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 
Step LRFD Design Activity Responsible Disciplines 
1. Develop preliminary bridge layout.  The desired bridge type, 
size and location will be established.  Span lengths and pier 
locations will be defined, considering geometrical and 
environmental constraints. 
Structural, in coordination with 
general civil and environmental 
considerations and geotechnical 
for approach stability 
2. Determine the shallow foundation feasibility based on review 
of existing geologic and subsurface data.  Competent bearing 
material must be present within a reasonable distance from the 
ground surface.  A preliminary assessment of approach 
embankment stability should be conducted to evaluate potential 
impacts to abutment locations and span lengths.  (Section 4.1). 
Geotechnical, in coordination 
with structural, general and 
environmental 
3. A site reconnaissance with the structural and general civil 
engineer should be completed at this stage to evaluate 
constructability of foundation types (Section 4.2). 
Geotechnical, in coordination 
with structural, general and 
environmental 
4. Determine the depth of the footing so that it will not be 
susceptible to scour potential or frost (Section 6.2). 
Hydraulic, with geologic input 
from geotechnical 
5. Determine the loads applied to the footing (Section 6.3).   Structural 
6. Determine the design soil properties from the subsurface 
exploration and laboratory testing program (Sections 4.3 and 
4.4). 
Geotechnical 
7. Calculate the nominal bearing resistance, based on effective 
footing width, B′f (Section 5.2) at the strength and extreme 
limit states. 
Geotechnical 
8. Calculate the nominal bearing resistance based on effective 
footing dimensions at the service limit state (Section 5.3). 
Geotechnical 
9. Calculate the sliding and passive soil resistance at the 
strength and extreme limit state (Section 5.4). 
Geotechnical 
10. When overall stability of the footing may govern the design 
(e.g., footings on or near slopes), perform a global stability 
analysis of the footing using service (unfactored) loads 
(Section 5.4).   
Geotechnical 
11. Size the footing dimensions at the service limit state (Section 
6.4.1).   
Structural 
12. Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and 
sliding at the strength limit state (Sections 6.4.3 and 6.4.4). 
Structural 
13. Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and 
sliding at the extreme limit state (Sections 6.4.3 and 6.4.4). 
Structural 
14. Complete the structural design of the footing using factored 
loads according to the concrete section of the specification 
(AASHTO, 1998). 
Structural 
C - 11 

 
1.  Develop Preliminary Bridge 
Layout (ST) 
2.  Review existing geologic and 
subsurface data (GT) 
3.  Site Reconnaissance (GT) 
4.  Determine depth of footing for 
scour and frost protection 
(Hydraulic, GT) 
6.  Subsurface exploration and 
laboratory testing (GT) 
7. Calculate nominal bearing 
resistance at the strength and 
extreme limit states (GT) 
10.  Check overall (global) stability 
using service (unfactored) loads 
(GT) 
13.  Check the bearing pressure, 
eccentricity and sliding at the 
extreme limit state (ST) 
5.  Determine loads applied to the 
footing (ST) 
11.  Size the footing at the service 
limit state (ST) 
14.  Complete structural design of 
the footing using factored loads (ST) 
8. Calculate nominal bearing 
resistance at the service limit state 
(GT) 
9. Calculate sliding and passive soil 
resistance at the strength and 
extreme limit states (GT) 
12. Check the bearing pressure, 
eccentricity, and sliding at the 
strength limit states (ST) 
ST = Structural 
GT = Geotechnical 
 
Figure C-1: LRFD Design Process Flow Chart – Bridge  
Shallow Foundations 
 
C - 12 

LRFD EXAMPLE C1: INTERIOR BRIDGE PIER ON SPREAD FOOTING 
(Note: This example uses the same given geometry, loading and subsurface conditions as 
Example 1 in Appendix B, which was worked using Service Load Design criteria.) 
Given: 
• Subsurface profile at the interior bridge pier is shown in Figure C1-1. 
• There is no scour potential at this site. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 38 mm (1.5 in). 
• The direction conventions are shown in Figure C1-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Load and Resistance Factor Design at the Service I, Strength I 
and Extreme I limit states (Table C-2).  Assume factor, η, = 1.0. 
 
Boring B-1
?
Unit 1:
Lean Clay
Unit 2:
Silty Sand
Unit 3a:
Well graded Sand
Unit 3b:
Well graded Sand
(saturated)
Unit 4:
Clean, uniform Sand
6
7
18
20
22
42
38
47
33
45
42
37
49
Column Diameter,
D = 0.6 m
SPT N-value
g =19.6 kN/m3
2.3 m
2.1 m
4.7 m
3.0 m
3.0 m
g =19.6 kN/m3
g =19.6 kN/m3
g =19.6 kN/m3
 
Figure C1-1: Subsurface Profile 
C - 13 

 
Area of Column, Acol
Lf
Bf
Df
Z - Transverse
Direction of Bridge
Y - Longitudinal
Direction of Bridge
P
Mz - Moment About
Z-Axis due to
Longitudinal Loading
My - Moment About
Y-Axis due to
Transverse Loading
Soil
Footing
 
Figure C1-2: Sign Conventions and Loading Directions 
Solution: 
The solution can be obtained by following the step-by-step process shown in Figure C-1, Design 
Process Flow Chart. 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:  
The structural, hydraulics and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required 
design information is provided in the problem given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads applied to the footing: 
The structural engineer has calculated and provided the values shown in Table C1-1. 
 
 
C - 14 

TABLE C1-1: LOADS AT COLUMN BASE 
 Axial, P Shear, V Moment, MZ Moment, MY 
Load kN kN kN-m kN-m 
Dead load 
components (DW) 
6400 167 211 748 
Live load (LL) 1670 42 409 196.5 
Vehicular dynamic 
load allowance 
(IM) 
315 8 77 37 
Wind on structure 
(WS) 
884 49 89 226 
Wind on live load 
(WL) 
18 4 7 26 
Earthquake (EQ) 1671 804 1675 5546 
 
Loads for Service I Limit State: 
The general equation for this set of loads and limit state is: 
)IM(LLDC[ Q IMLLPiii γ + )( γ + )( γη=γη∑  (after Eqn. 3.4.1-1,  
)]EQ(WL)WS( EQWLWS γ+ )( γ+γ+  AASHTO, 1998) 
At the Service I limit state, all load factors are 1.0 except for wind on the structure (WS), which 
is taken as 0.3, and earthquake, which is an extreme limit state load and is not included in service 
limit state checks (Table 3.4.1-1, AASHTO, 1998).  Also note that the AASHTO specifications 
provide for taking the vehicular dynamic load allowance (impact) as zero for design of 
substructures.  We will also take the factor, η, to be 1.0.  Assume the effect of footing self-weight 
is negligible.  So the Service I limit state loads are as follows: 
 Axial loads: 
kN
kNkNkNkNkNkN
EQWLWSIMLLP
8353P
)]1671(0180.1)884(3.0)0(0.11670(0.16400(1.0[1.0 P
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ P
=
+ )( ++ + )  + ) =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
 
 Shear: 
kN
kNkNkNkNkNkN
EQWLWSIMLLP
228V
)]804(040.1)49(3.0)0(0.1420.11671.0[1.0 V
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ V
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
 
C - 15 

 Moment in the Z direction: 
mkN
Z
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
Z
EQWLWSIMLLPZ
654M
)]1675(070.1
)89(3.0)0(0.14090.12111.0[1.0 M
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
 
 Moment in the Y direction: 
mkN
Y
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
Y
EQWLWSIMLLPY
1038M
)]5546(0260.1
)226(3.0)0(0.15.1960.17481.0[1.0 M
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
Loads for Strength I Limit State: 
At the strength limit state, all load factors for the dead load components will be taken as 
minimums or maximums, depending on whether the load acts to stabilize or destabilize the 
footing.  For this set of loads, the following load factors, γP, will be applied for the various design 
checks: 
For checking bearing resistance: γP = γmax = 1.25 
For checking sliding:   γP = γmin = 0.9 
For checking eccentricity:  γP = γmin = 0.9 
Note that the AASHTO specifications provide for taking the vehicular dynamic load allowance 
(impact) as zero for design of substructures.  Also assume that the effect of footing self-weight is 
negligible.  The minimum load cases will conservatively ignore live load.  So the Strength I limit 
state loads are as follows: 
 Axial loads: 
kN
max
kN
kNkNkNkNkN
max
EQWLWSIMLLPmax
10923P
)]1671(0
180)884(0)0(0.1167075.164001.0[1.25 P
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ P
=
+
 )( ++ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
C - 16 

kN
min
kNkNkNkNkNkN
min
5760P
)]1671(0180)884(0)0(0.1075.164001.0[0.9 P
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =  
 Shear: 
kN
max
kNkNkNkNkNkN
max
EQWLWSIMLLPmax
282V
)]804(040)49(0)0(0.14275.11671.0[1.25 V
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ V
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
kN
min
kNkNkNkNkNkN
min
150V
)]804(040)49(0)0(0.1075.11671.0[0.9 V
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =  
 Moment in the Z direction: 
mkN
maxZ
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
maxZ
EQWLWSIMLLPmaxZ
980M
)]1675(070
)89(0)0(0.140975.12111.0[1.25 M
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
mkN
minZ
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
minZ
190M
)]1675(070
)89(0)0(0.1075.1211(1.0[0.9 M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + ) =
 
 Moment in the Y direction: 
mkN
maxY
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
maxY
EQWLWSIMLLPmaxY
1279M
)]5546(0260
)226(0)0(0.15.19675.17481.0[1.25 M
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
mkN
minY
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
minY
673M
)]5546(0260
)226(0)0(0.1075.17481.0[0.9 M
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
 
 
 
C - 17 

Loads for Extreme I Limit State: 
At the extreme limit state, all load factors for the dead load components will be taken as 
maximums, since the dynamic model used maximum factored loads to compute the earthquake 
forces.  The designer should be consistent with respect to application of load factors.  A separate 
check using earthquake loads computed using minimum load factors should also be performed.  
For the set of loads in this example, the following load factors, γP, will be applied for the various 
design checks: 
For checking bearing resistance: γP = γmax = 1.25 
For checking sliding:   γP = γmax = 1.25 
For checking eccentricity:  γP = γmax = 1.25 
The AASHTO commentary suggests that the load factor for live load at the extreme limit state, 
γEQ, should be taken as 0.5.  This does not reflect current practice; therefore, γEQ for live load will 
be taken as zero. 
Note that the AASHTO specifications provide for taking the vehicular dynamic load allowance 
(impact) as zero for design of substructures.  Also assume that the effect of footing self-weight is 
negligible.  So the Extreme I limit state loads are as follows: 
 Axial loads for evaluating bearing stress (seismic force acting downward): 
kN
E
kNkNkNkNkNkN
E
EQWLWSIMLLPE
9671P
)]1671(0.1180)884(0)0(0.11670064001.0[1.25 P
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ P
max
max
max
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
 Axial loads for evaluating eccentricity and sliding (seismic force acting upward): 
kN
E
kNkNkNkNkNkN
E
6329P
)]1671(0.1180)884(0)0(0.11670064001.0[1.25 P
min
min
=
− )( ++ + )(  + )( =
 
 Shear: 
kN
E
kNkNkNkNkNkN
E
EQWLWSIMLLPE
1013V
)]804(0.140)49(0)0(0.14201671.0[1.25 V
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ V
=
+ )( ++ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
  
C - 18 

 Moment in the Z direction: 
mkN
Z
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
Z
EQWLWSIMLLPZ
1939M
)]1675(0.170
)89(0)0(0.140902111.0[1.25 M
)]EQ(WL)WS()IM(LLDC[ M
E
E
E
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
γ+ )( γ+γ+γ + )( γ + )( γη=
 
 Moment in the Y direction: 
mkN
Y
mkNmkN
mkNmkNmkNmkN
Y
6481M
)]5546(0.1260
)226(0)0(0.15.19607481.0[1.25 M
E
E
−
−−
−−−−
=
+ )( +
+ + )(  + )( =
 
Step 6 – Conduct Field Exploration and Laboratory Testing:  
This step is complete, and the subsurface data are shown in a drawing at the pier location, Figure 
C1-1.  Because of the granular nature of the soils encountered in the boring, laboratory testing 
was limited to soil classifications and moisture content.  The foundation design will be based 
largely on design parameters correlated to the soil classifications and the SPT N-values.  
Compute the initial vertical effective stresses at the midpoint of each layer: 
Layer 2: 
kPa7.65)6.19(m35.3' 3m
kN
2vo ==σ  
Layer 3a: 
kPa132)6.19(m75.6' 3m
kN
a3vo ==σ  
Layer 3b: 
kPa193)8.9(m5.1)6.19(m6.10' 3m
kN
3m
kN
b3vo =−=σ  
Layer 4: 
kPa222)8.9(m5.4)6.19(m6.13' 3m
kN
3m
kN
4vo =−=σ  
The effective stress diagram for the profile at the pier location is plotted in Figure C1-3. 
C - 19 

2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
Depth (m)
100 2000 300 400
u
Vertical Stress (kPa)
132
65.7
267
208193
222
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3a
Unit 4
Unit 3b
σVoσ'Vo
 
 Figure C1-3: Effective Stress Diagram 
 
Step 7 – Calculate nominal bearing resistance at the strength and extreme limit state:   
The general equation for bearing capacity is: 
 bsCNB5.0dbsCqN bscNq WfqqqWqcccult q γγγ γγ++=  (Eqn. 5-14) 
The first term goes to zero since the foundation materials are granular and noncohesive, so the 
cohesion term, c, is zero. 
 
For the interior pier, we will assume that the footing is essentially rectangular (L/B < 5). Recall 
that the shape and inclination factors should not be applied together (see discussion in Section 
5.2).  Since the effect of the shape factors is significant for rectangular footings, and considering 
the inclination resulting from the relatively small shear load component (V), we will only apply 
the shape factors as follows: 
 
f
f
L
B4.01s −=γ  (Table 5-2) 
6.0s =γ  Assume the effect of eccentricity is small for now, so  ff LB ≅
A design friction angle associated with Layer 2 is needed to calculate sq.  The geotechnical 
engineer has recommended that the footing be cast against the firm, undisturbed soil of Unit 2.  
Unit 2 is 2.1 m thick and overlies denser material at depth, so the properties of Unit 2 will govern 
C - 20 

the footing design.  From Figure C1-1, the average uncorrected SPT N-value for this layer is 20.  
From Figure C1-3, the average vertical effective stress in Layer 2 is 65.7 kPa (about 1.4 ksf).  
Entering Figure 4-1 with a blowcount of 20 and a vertical effective stress of 1.4 ksf, a relative 
density, DR, of about 75 percent is read.  Entering Figure 4-2 with this relative density for silty 
sand (Unified Soil Classification ‘SM’), a friction angle of 35 degrees is selected for computing 
bearing capacity.   
φ+= tanL
B1s
f
fq  (Table 5-2) 
7.1s
)35tan(1
11s
q
q
=
°+=  
Since this footing will be level, there is no effect of inclination of the base, so: 
0.1bb q ==γ  (Table 5-5) 
Since the overburden materials above the footing are cohesive soils, the correction factor to 
account for shearing resistance of the material above the bearing elevation, dq, should be set 
equal to 1.0: 
0.1dq =  (Table 5-4) 
Calculate the effect of the footing embedment, q.  Apply judgment; recognize that minimal 
excavation is necessary to remove all of the medium stiff, lean clay; thus avoiding any low 
strength or compressibility characteristics associated with this material.  Therefore, select Df = 
2.3 m to bear below Unit 1: 
 In this case, q is only a function of the depth of bearing. 
fov D''q γ=σ=  where: 3m
kN
bulk 6.19'= =γγ  
)m3.2)(6.19(q 3m
kN=  
kPa1.45q =  
Check ground water effect: 
 Depth of ground water table below the bearing depth: 
Df = Depth of footing = 2.3 m Assumes a 0.9-m-thick footing and 1.4-m 
cover 
Dw = Depth of ground water below the ground surface (Df ) = 9.1 m 
C - 21 

Conservatively estimate the footing width with an upper bound value of Bf = 6 m. 
 Calculate ground water correction factors, CWγ and CWq: 
 0.1DB5.1
D5.05.0C
ff
W
W ≤





++=γ   (Eqn. 5-9) 
 9.03.2)6(5.1
1.95.05.0CW =





++=γ   
 0.1D
D5.05.0C
f
W
qW ≤




+=   (Eqn. 5-10) 
 0.23.2
8.65.05.0C qW =



+=  ;  Use CWq = 1.0 
From Table 5-1, the bearing capacity factors, Nγ and Nq, are 48.0 and 33.3, respectively, for a 
friction angle of 35 degrees in Layer 2. 
So the equation for nominal bearing resistance at the strength and extreme limit states is: 
kPa2553B254q
)(1.0))(1.7)(1.0(33.3)(1.0 kPa 45.1 +0)9)(0.6)(1.)(48.0)(0.)(B (19.6 0.5 = q
dbsCqN  bsCNB5.0q 
fult
fult
qqqWqWfult
3m
kN
q
+=
+γ= γγγ γ
 
Since the nominal bearing resistance was computed using a soil friction angle correlated to SPT 
N-values, a resistance factor of ϕ = 0.35 should be applied to resistances computed using this 
equation when checking strength limit states per Table C-5 (from AASHTO (1998) Table  
10.5.5-1). 
Step 8 – Calculate the nominal bearing resistance at the service limit state: 
Calculate stress increase at the midpoint of each soil layer using the 2-on-1 stress distribution 
method for various footing widths; say Bf = 3, 4.6 and 6.1 m, as a function of the stress applied 
by the footing, q: 
)ZL)(ZB/(LBq ffffV ++⋅=σ∆  (Figure 5-12) 
2
f
2
f
V
ff
)ZB/(Bq
:so,LBbut
+=σ∆
≅
  
C - 22 

Layer 2 with midpoint of layer @ Z = 1.05 m below base of footing: 
55.0)05.13/(3q
222V =+=σ∆  
Layer 3a with midpoint of layer @ Z = 4.45 m below base of footing: 
16.0)45.43/(3q
22a3V =+=σ∆  
Layer 3b with midpoint of layer @ Z = 8.3 m below base of footing: 
07.0)3.83/(3q
22b3V =+=σ∆  
Layer 4 with midpoint of layer @ Z = 11.3 m below base of footing: 
04.0)3.113/(3q
224V =+=σ∆  
Perform similar calculations for Bf = 4.6 m and Bf = 6.1 m and tabulate: 
TABLE C1-2: STRESS INCREASE WITH DEPTH AS FUNCTION 
OF FOOTING WIDTH AND STRESS APPLIED BY THE FOOTING (q) 
Stress Increase, ∆σv 
Soil Layer 
Depth 
Range (m) Bf = 3 m Bf = 4.6 m Bf = 6.1 m 
2 2.3 – 4.4 0.55q 0.66q 0.73q 
3a 4.4 – 9.1 0.16q 0.26q 0.33q 
3b 9.1 – 12.1 0.07q 0.13q 0.18q 
4 12.1 – 15.1 0.04q 0.08q 0.12q 
 
For these footing widths, determine the stress that would need to be applied by footing in order 
to generate 38 mm of settlement using the Hough method.  These stresses will be plotted as a 
function of footing width to generate the nominal bearing resistance at the service limit state for 
a deformation (settlement) criterion of 38 mm. 
General equation: 
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH ovvov σσ∆+σ=∆  (Eqn. 5-24) 
Correct SPT blowcounts to account for overburden pressure, N′, for each layer, and enter Figure 
5-19 to obtain bearing capacity factor, C′: 
C - 23 

Layer 2: 
Navg = 20 
N′/N = 1.2  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 24 
C′ = 65   (from Figure 5-19 for silty Sand) 
Layer 3a: 
Navg = 40 
N′/N = 0.9  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 36 
C′ = 120  (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded Sand) 
Layer 3b: 
Navg = 43 
N′/N = 0.7  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 30 
C′ = 102  (from Figure 5-19 for well-graded Sand) 
Layer 4: 
Navg = 40 
N′/N = 0.66  (from Figure 5-18) 
N′ = 26 
C′ =110  (from Figure 5-19 for clean, uniform Sand) 
Calculate settlement in each layer and sum the settlements to find the applied stress required to 
yield a total settlement of 38 mm at a footing width of 3 m.  This is an iterative process. 
Layer 2: 
mm25m025.0H
)]kPa7.65/))kPa600(55.0kPa7.65log[()65/1(m1.2H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
2
2
vvv22 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
Layer 3a: 
mm9m009.0H
)]kPa132/))kPa600(16.0kPa132log[()120/1(m7.4H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
a3
a3
vvva3a3 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
Layer 3b: 
mm3m003.0H
)]kPa193/))kPa600(07.0kPa193log[()102/1(m0.3H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
b3
b3
vvv3b3 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
C - 24 

Layer 4: 
mm1m001.0H
)]kPa222/))kPa600(04.0kPa222log[()110/1(m3H
]'/)'log[()'C/1(HH
4
4
vvv44 oo
==∆
+=∆
σσ∆+σ=∆
 
mm38mm1mm3mm9mm25Hi =+++=∆∑  
Repeat this process for several footing widths over the expected range of footing dimensions – 
say, 1.5 to 7 m (a spreadsheet or computer tool can make these iterative calculations rapidly).  
Plot the results as a function of effective footing width as shown in Figure C1-4. 
 
LRFD Service Limit State Nominal Bearing Resistance vs. 
Effective Footing Width for 38 mm of Settlement
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
024 6
Effective Footing Width, B' (m)
Nominal Bearing Stress (kPa)
8
 
Figure C1-4: Nominal Bearing Resistance vs. Effective Footing  
Width at Service-I Limit State 
The geotechnical engineer should provide this chart and the equation for computing nominal 
resistances at the strength limit state, with the corresponding resistance factor (Step 7), to the 
structural designer for sizing of the footing.  Note that the nominal resistance shown in Figure 
C1-4 is only applicable for service limit state design checks because it was developed with a 
serviceability limitation (e.g., maximum permissible settlement of 38 mm).  The resistance factor 
associated with nominal resistances obtained from Figure C1-4 is 1.0. 
C - 25 

Step 9 – Calculate nominal sliding and passive soil resistance at the strength and extreme 
limit state: 
The footing will bear in the Unit 2 soils.  The friction angle of 35 degrees selected in Step 7 will 
be used to compute sliding resistance. 
The equation for calculating sliding resistance of concrete footings cast against the soil is: 
φ= tanPQ vT  (Eqn. C-4) 
The ultimate, or nominal, sliding resistance is: 
)P(7.035tanPQ vvT =°=  
The resistance factor associated with strength limit state checks is ϕ = 0.8 (Table 10.5.5-1, 
AASHTO, 1998). 
Since the sliding resistance will develop at strain levels much lower than that needed to develop 
passive pressures against the side of the footing, passive pressure will be ignored unless it is 
found that sliding resistance governs the design of the footing.  The geotechnical engineer should 
provide this equation and the assumptions regarding use of passive pressures to the structural 
engineer for checking the footing’s sliding resistance at the strength and extreme limit states. 
Step 10 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The geotechnical engineer has determined that since this is an interior pier with level ground 
conditions, global stability is not a concern. 
Step 11 – Size the footing at the service limit state: 
First determine the eccentricity of the loads applied to the footing in both directions.  This will be 
used to find the effective footing dimensions, B′f and L′f. 
m078.08353654e
PMe
kNmkN
y
Zy
=÷=
÷=
−  
m124.083531038e
PMe
kmkN
z
Yz
=÷=
÷=
−  
Estimate trial footing dimensions.  Try 5-m-by-5-m footing and calculate effective footing 
dimensions.  The smaller will be used to enter Figure C1-4 to determine the nominal bearing 
resistance at the service limit state. 
m844.4)m078.0(2m5B
e2BB
f
yff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-6) 
C - 26 

m752.4)m124.0(2m5L
e2LL
f
zff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-7) 
Since L′f is less than B′f, use L′f = 4.752 m to check nominal bearing resistance at the service 
limit state.  From Figure C1-4, the nominal bearing resistance for this effective footing 
dimension is about 390 kPa.  Compute applied bearing stress over effective footing area, A′: 
2
ff m0.23)m752.4)(m844.4(LBA ==′⋅′=′  
kPa363m0.238353APq 2kN
applied =÷=′÷=  
This is less than 390 kPa from Figure C1-4 for settlement less than 38 mm.  Use 5-m-by-5-m 
footing to perform the rest of the design checks. 
Check assumption to neglect self-weight of footing, assuming a footing thickness of 1 m: 
kNm/kNm/kN
ftg
soilconcreteftgftg
98)6.195.23)(m1)(m5)(m5(W
)(VW
33
=−=
γ−γ=
 
This should be less than about 1 to 2 percent of the axial load applied to the footing, or: 
kNkN 167)8353(02.0P%2 ==  (OK) 
Step 12 – Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and sliding at the strength 
limit state: 
Bearing Pressure: 
Compute effective footing dimensions and bearing area using maximum load factors applied to 
the dead load components: 
m089.010923980e
PMe
kNmkN
y
maxmaxZy
=÷=
÷=
−  
m117.0109231279e
PMe
kmkN
z
maxmaxYz
=÷=
÷=
−  
m82.4)m089.0(2m5B
e2BB
f
yff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-6) 
m766.4)m117.0(2m5L
e2LL
f
zff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-7) 
C - 27 

2
ff m0.23)m766.4)(m82.4(LBA ==′⋅′=′  
kPa475m0.2310923APq 2kN
applied =÷=′÷=  
Nominal bearing resistance at this effective footing width (use L′f as minimum value): 
kPa3764kPa2553)m766.4(254q
kPa2553B254q
ult
fult
=+=
+′=
 
The factored resistance at the strength limit state is then: 
kPa1317Q
)kPa3764(35.0)q(Q
R
ultR
=
=ϕ=  
This is greater than qapplied = 475 kPa  (OK) 
Maximum eccentricity: 
The maximum eccentricity in any direction should be less than one-fourth of the actual footing 
dimension (AASHTO, 1998).  The maximum eccentricity is evaluated using the minimum load 
factor combination: 
m033.05760190e
PMe
kNmkN
y
minminZy
=÷=
÷=
−  
m117.05760673e
PMe
kmkN
z
minminYz
=÷=
÷=
−  
m25.1)m5(4
1L4
1B4
1
ff ===  
m25.1ee zy <<    (OK) 
Sliding: 
The factored horizontal shear force must be less than the factored nominal sliding resistance.  
This is evaluated using minimum load factors.  The equation for QT is provided in Step 9.  
Passive resistance is ignored, so Qep is zero. 
QR = ϕTQT+ϕepQep (Eqn. C-3) 
kNkN
R 3226))5760(7.0(8.0Q ==  
C - 28 

kNkN
min 3226224V <=   (OK) 
Step 13 – Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and sliding at the extreme 
limit state: 
Bearing Pressure: 
Compute effective footing dimensions and bearing area using maximum load factors applied to 
the dead load components: 
m200.096711939e
PMe
kNmkN
y
EZy maxE
=÷=
÷=
−  
m670.096716481e
PMe
kmkN
z
EYz maxE
=÷=
÷=
−  
m60.4)m200.0(2m5B
e2BB
f
yff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-6) 
m66.3)m670.0(2m5L
e2LL
f
zff
=−=′
−=′
 (Eqn. 6-7) 
2
ff m8.16)m66.3)(m60.4(LBA ==′⋅′=′  
kPa576m8.169671APq 2kN
Eapplied max =÷=′÷=  
Nominal bearing resistance at this effective footing width (use either B′f or L′f as minimum 
value): 
kPa3483kPa2553)m66.3(254q
kPa2553B254q
ult
fult
=+=
+′=
 
The factored resistance at the extreme limit state is then: 
kPa3483Q
)kPa3483(0.1)q(Q
R
ultR
=
=ϕ=  
This is greater than qapplied = 576 kPa  (OK) 
C - 29 

Maximum eccentricity: 
The maximum eccentricity in any direction should be less than one-fourth of the actual footing 
dimension.  The maximum eccentricity is evaluated using the minimum load factor combination: 
m306.063291939e
PMe
kNmkN
y
EZy minE
=÷=
÷=
−  
m024.163296481e
PMe
kmkN
z
EYz minE
=÷=
÷=
−  
m25.1)m5(4
1L4
1B4
1
ff ===  
m25.1ee zy <<    (OK) 
Sliding: 
The factored horizontal shear force must be less than the factored nominal sliding resistance.  
This is evaluated using minimum load factors: 
QR = ϕTQT+ϕepQep (Eqn. C-3) 
kNkN
R 4430))6329(7.0(0.1Q ==  
kNkN
E 44301013V <=   (OK) 
 
Step 14 – Complete structural design of footing: 
The structural engineer completes this step. 
C - 30 

LRFD EXAMPLE 2: STUB SEAT-TYPE BRIDGE ABUTMENT ON STRUCTURAL FILL 
(Note: This example uses the same given geometry, loading and subsurface conditions as 
Example 3 in Appendix B, which was solved using Service Load Design criteria.) 
Given: 
• A seat-type abutment on a spread footing is proposed for a bridge. 
• The footing length is L = 25.0 m (82 ft). 
• The foundation soils and abutment dimensions are shown in Figure C2-1. 
• Frost penetration depth is 0.6 m (2 ft). 
• Tolerable settlement is 38 mm (1.5 in). 
• Abutment loading symbols are shown in Figure C2-2. 
Find: 
• Size the footing based on Load and Resistance Factor Design at the Service I and 
Strength I states.  Assume that the importance factor, η, = 1.0.  Check for overturning and 
sliding. 
5.24 m
2
1
0.46 m 0.91 m
1.22 m
2.0 m
0.51 m
B1 .5 B
Dense GRAVEL
Structural fill (Well-graded silty  SAND & GRAVEL)
SILT
Well-graded fine to medium
silty  SAND
N  =  Uncorrected SPT Blowcount
 Lay er 1
2.0 m Existing Ground
Surf ace
Key
Boring B-1
SPT  N-v alue
5
4
6
6
7
11
8
10
15
19
22
28
> 50
> 50
 φ =  38 deg  (assumed, N' = 32)
 γ =  20.5 kN/m 3
 γ =  17.3 kN/m 3
 φ =  friction angle
 γsat  =  19.6 kN/m 3
N'  =  Corrected SPT Blowcount
Lay er 2
2.57 m
Lay er 3
3.0 m
Lay er 4
3.0 m
Lay er 5
3.0 m
Lay er 6
3.0 m
N' = 10
N' = 10
N' = 15
N' = 20
 
Figure C2-1: Approach Embankment and Foundation 
C - 31 

 
0.4 H
0.5 H
Active Earth
Pressure, pa
Traffic
Surcharge, pLS
PA
PLS
 
Stem and
Girder Seat
Footing
Habut
Bf
Tf
Dtoe
Tstem
Superstructure
Backfill
TGS
Toe
Mtoe
+
 
Figure C2-2: Direction and Load Conventions per LRFD Methodology 
C - 32 

Solution: 
Steps 1 through 4 – Preliminary bridge layout, review of existing geologic and subsurface 
data, site reconnaissance, scour and frost potential:   
The structural, hydraulic and geotechnical engineers completed these steps.  The required design 
information is provided in the problem-given statement. 
Step 5 – Determine the loads: 
Moments are taken about the toe of the footing.  The sense of the moment is positive if 
counterclockwise (resisting moments) and negative if clockwise (overturning moments). 
Loads from the girders: 
The structural engineer has calculated and provided the values shown in Table C2-1. 
TABLE C2-1: LOADS FROM GIRDERS 
 
Load 
Axial, P 
(kN) 
Shear, V 
(kN) 
Moment, MZ 
(kN•m) 
Dead load of components, P (DC) 5233 - 7274 
Dead load of wearing surfaces, P (DW) 446 - 620 
Vehicular live load, P (LL) 1538 - 2138 
Shear loads from bearing pads, V 
(TU+CR+SH) 
- 1047 -3392 
 
The shear load is computed as the force transmitted through the bearings due to rib shortening, 
shrinkage and temperature and is considered in both Strength I and Service I states.  The 
moments calculated are due to the vertical and shear loads and are taken about the toe of the 
footing. 
Dead loads of the abutment components (per m of abutment wall): 
Dead loads of the abutment components, and the moments caused by these loads about the toe of 
the footing, were calculated as part of Service Load Design Example 3 (Appendix B).  These 
values are valid for the unfactored loads of the LRFD design and are listed in Table C2-2. 
Loads from approach fill: 
Loads from the approach fill, and the moments caused by these loads about the toe of the 
footing, were calculated as part of Service Load Design Example 3 (Appendix B).  These values 
remain valid for the LRFD solution, with the exception of the horizontal earth pressure for the 
live load surcharge, PLS, and the moment due to active lateral earth pressure (Mtoe due to EH).   
Horizontal earth pressure from live load surcharge:   
C - 33 

From Table C-4, heq = 0.7 m for a wall height of 5.24 m, and:  
m/kN69.18
)m24.5)(m70.0)(m/kN6.19)(26.0(
H)hK(P
3
abuteqaLS
=
=
γ=
 
m62.2
)m24.5)(5.0(
H)5.0(arm abutLS
=
=
=
 
m/mkN97.48
)m62.2)(m/kN69.18(
armPM LSLSz
⋅−=
−=
⋅−=
 
Moment due to active lateral earth pressure: 
The code (AASHTO, 1998) specifies application of the resultant due to lateral earth 
pressure at 0.4 times the height of the abutment, Habut, due to the effects of backfill 
compaction.  Therefore: 
m/mkN6.146
)m24.5)(m/kN96.69(4.0
)H)(P(4.0M abutAtoe
⋅−=
−=
=
 
The loads and moments computed above are summarized in Table C2-2, along with values that 
are unchanged from Service Load Design Example 3 (Appendix B). 
TABLE C2-2: LOADS OF ABUTMENT COMPONENTS AND  
HORIZONTAL EARTH PRESSURES 
Load Vertical 
(kN/m) 
Horizontal 
(kN/m) 
Moment, Mtoe 
(kN•m/m) 
Weight of stem, Wstem (DC) 57.29 - 84.79 
Weight of footing, Wf (DC) 10.81Bf - 5.41Bf
2 
Weight of soil over toe, Wtoe (EV) - - - 
Weight of soil over heel, Wh (EV) (93.69)(Bf –1.73) - (93.69)(Bf –1.73) 
*(0.865+0.5Bf) 
Active earth pressure load, PA (EH) - 69.96 -146.6 
Horizontal earth load from live load 
surcharge, PLS (LS) 
- 18.69 -48.97 
Note: Bf = width of footing in meters 
C - 34 

Loads for Service I Limit State: 
The general equation for this set of loads and limit states is: 
)]SH()CR()TU(LSLL(
EHEVDWDC[ Q
SHCRTULLLL
PPPPiii
γ+γ+γ +)( γ + ) γ +
)( γ +)( γ +)( γ + )( γη=γη∑  
At the service limit state, all load factors except those for uniform temperature, creep and 
shrinkage are 1.0.  At the service limit state, the load factors γTU, γCR and γSH for force effects are 
all equal to 1.0.  
Loads for Strength I Limit State: 
At the strength limit state, all load factors for the dead load components will be taken as 
minimums or maximums, depending on whether the load acts to stabilize or destabilize the 
footing.  At the strength limit state, the load factors γTU, γCR and γSH for force effects are all equal 
to 0.5.  
For this set of loads, the following load factors, γP, will be applied for the various design checks: 
For checking bearing resistance: γP for DC = γmax = 1.25 
     γP for DW = γmax = 1.50 
     γP for EV = γmax = 1.35 
     γLL = 1.75 
     γLS = 1.75 
 
For checking sliding:   γP for DC = γmin = 0.90 
     γP for DW = γmin = 0 
     γP for EV = γmin = 1.00 
     γP for EH = γmax = 1.50 
     γLL = 0 
     γLS = 1.75 
     γTU,CR,SH = γmax = 0.5 
 
For checking eccentricity:  γP for DC = γmin = 0.90 
     γP for DW = γmin = 0 
     γP for EV = γmin = 1.00 
     γP for EH = γmax = 1.50 
     γLL = 0 
     γLS = 1.75 
     γTU,CR,SH = γmax = 0.5 
C - 35 

Step 6 – Conduct field exploration and laboratory testing: 
This step is complete and the subsurface data are shown in Figure C2-1.  The initial vertical 
effective stresses are the same as computed for Service Load Design Example 3 (Appendix B) 
and are not repeated here. 
Step 7 – Calculate nominal bearing resistance at the strength limit state: 
The ultimate bearing capacity was calculated for this abutment in Service Load Design Example 
3 (Appendix B).  The ultimate bearing capacity for effective footing widths of 3, 4, and 5 m were 
1414 kPa, 869 kPa, and 605 kPa.  Due to the eccentric load effects, it will be useful to plot a few 
more values for smaller effective footing widths.  Using the same methods used in the Service 
Load Design Example 3 (Appendix B) for effective footing widths of 2 and 2.5 meters: 
55.12m0.2
m0.25
B
L
f
f >==  
1s =γ , b , and C  1=γ 1W =γ
685.0m2/m37.1B/D ff ==  
By interpolation, for ,685.0B/D ff =  
60)1780)(685.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
And: 
kPa1230
)1)(1)(1)(60)(0.2)(m/kN5.20)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
Similarly, for 2.5 m: 
548.0m5.2/m37.1B/D ff ==  
By interpolation, for ,548.0B/D ff =  
5.51)1780)(548.0(17N q ≅−+=γ  
And: 
C - 36 

kPa1320
)1)(1)(1)(5.51)(5.2)(m/kN5.20)(5.0(
bsCNB5.0q
3
Wqfult
=
=
γ= γγγγ
 
The results are plotted in Figure C2-3.  As discussed in Example 3, the pressure bulb for 
effective footing widths greater than about 3 m begins to extend into the upper foundation silt 
layer, reducing the bearing capacity, and producing the shape of curve shown in Figure C2-3. 
LRFD Strength Limit State Nominal Bearing 
Resistance vs. Effective Footing Width
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
Effective Footing Width, B'f (m)
Nominal Bearing Stress (kPa)
 
Figure C2-3: Nominal Stress versus Effective Footing  
Width at Strength 1 Limit State 
Since the nominal bearing resistance was computed using a soil friction angle correlated to SPT 
N-values, a resistance factor of ϕ = 0.35 should be applied to resistances from Figure C2-3 when 
checking strength limit states. 
Step 8 – Calculate the nominal bearing resistance at the service limit state: 
Settlement estimates were made for effective footing widths of 3 m, 4 m, and 5 m, as part of the 
Service Load Design Example 3.  The estimated settlement for various combinations of footing 
widths and applied load were used to estimate the bearing pressure resulting in 38 mm of 
settlement for each footing width.  The process was repeated for several footing widths over the 
expected range of footing dimensions (a spreadsheet or other computer tool can make these 
calculations rapidly).  The results are plotted as a function of effective footing width, as shown in 
Figure C2-4. 
C - 37 

LRFD Service Limit State Nominal Bearing Resistance vs. 
Effective Footing Width for 38 mm of Settlement
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0123 45678
Effective Footing Width, B'f (m)
Nominal Bearing Stress (kPa)
Figure C2-4: Nominal Bearing Resistance versus Effective Footing  
Width at Service-1 Limit State 
The geotechnical engineer should provide both charts of nominal resistances at the strength and 
service limit states (e.g. Figures C2-3 and C2-4) to the structural designer for sizing of the 
footing. 
Step 9 – Calculate nominal sliding and passive soil resistance at the strength limit state: 
The footing concrete will be poured on compacted structural fill.  Thus the friction angle δ to be 
used in the sliding analysis of the footing will be: 
°=φ′=δ 38  
The equation for calculating sliding resistance of concrete footings cast against the soil is: 
φ= tanPQ vT  
The ultimate, or nominal, sliding resistance is: 
)P(78.0Q vT =  
The resistance factor associated with strength limit state checks is ϕ = 0.8 (Table 10.5.5-1, 
AASHTO, 1998). 
C - 38 

The passive resistance of the soil in front of the footing will be ignored. 
Step 10 – Check global stability of the footing: 
The geotechnical engineer has determined that the global stability is satisfactory (see Service 
Load Design Example 3). 
Step 11 – Size the footing at the service limit state under full loading: 
Select a trial footing width, say Bf = 3.2 m. 
Check bearing resistance for Bf = 3.2 m: 
Analyze for 1 m of abutment width.  Under the service limit state the load factors are taken as 
1.0. 
From Table C2-1, the loads and moments due to the loads of the superstructure are: 
m/kN7.288
m25
kN)15384465233(
LLDWDC
]LL0.1DW0.1DC[1.00.1
]LLDWDC([P LLPPgirdersv
=
++=
++=
)(+)( + )(=
)( γ+)( γ+) γη=
 
m/mkN6.265
m25
mkN)3392(0.1mkN)21386207274(
]SH)CR1.0(TU1.0(LL)1.0(DW)[1.0(DC)0.1
SH)](0.1CR)(0.11.0(TU))LL()DW()DC([M LLPPgirderstoe
⋅=
⋅−+⋅++=
+++++=
+++ γ+ γ+ γη=
 
From Table C2-2, the loads and moments due to abutment components are: 
m/kN6.229
)73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(81.10(29.57
)73.1B)(69.93(B81.1029.57
]EV0.1DC[1.00.1
]EVDC([P
ff
PPabutv
=
−++=
−++=
)( + )(=
)( γ+) γη=
 
 
 
C - 39 

)]LS(EHEVDC[M LSPPPabuttoe γ+)( γ+)( γ+)( γη=  
m/mkN1.284
97.486.146))2.3)(5.0(865.0)(73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(41.5(79.84
97.486.146)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(B41.579.84
]LS0.1EH0.1EV0.1DC[1.00.1
2
ff
2
f
⋅=
−−+−++=
−−+−++=
)(+)(+)( + )(=
 
The total loads and moments are: 
m/mkN3.518
m/kN6.229m/kN7.288
PPP abutvgirdersvv
⋅=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN7.549
m/mkN1.284m/mkN6.265
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is: 
m06.1
)m/kN3.518/()m/mkN7.549(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is 
m54.0
m06.1m6.1
m06.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
 
Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
m12.2
)m54.0)(2(m2.3
e2BB yff
=
−=
−=′
 
C - 40 

kPa8.246
)m12.2/()m/kN3.518(
B/Pq fvapplied
=
=
′=
 
This is less than 295 kPa from Figure C2-4 for settlement less than 38 mm and B′f = 2.12 m.  Use 
3.2 m footing to perform the rest of the design checks.  
Step 12a – Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and sliding at the Strength I 
limit state under full loading: 
Check maximum eccentricity for Bf = 3.2 m: 
From Table C2-1, resisting loads are multiplied by minimum factors and driving loads are 
multiplied by maximum factors.  At the strength limit state, the load factors γTU, γCR and γSH for 
force effects are all equal to 0.5.  
The loads and moments due to the superstructure are: 
m/kN4.188
m25
kN)1538(0)446(0)5233(9.0
)LL(0)DW(0)DC(9.0
]LL(0DW0DC[0.90.1
]LLDW()DC([P LLminPminPgirdersv
=
++=
++=
)+)( + )(=
)(γ+) γ+ γη=
 
m/mkN0.194
m25
mkN)3392(5.0)2138(0)620(0)7274(9.0
]SH)CR(TU5.00(LL)0(DW)[0.9(DC)0.1
SH)](5.0CR)(5.0TU)(5.0)LL()DW()DC([M LLminPminPgirderstoe
⋅=
⋅−+++=
+++++=
+++γ+ γ+γη=
 
From Table C2-2, the loads and moments due to abutment components are: 
m/kN4.220
)73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(81.10(9.0)29.57(9.0
)73.1B)(69.93()B81.1029.57(9.0
)]EV(00.1)DC[0.9(0.1
)]EV()DC([P
ff
minPminPabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 + =
γ+ γη=
 
C - 41 

m/mkN1.160
)97.48(75.1)6.146(5.1
))2.3)(5.0(865.0)(73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(41.5(9.0)79.84(9.0
)97.48(75.1)6.146(5.1
))]B)(5.0(865.0)(73.1B)(69.93[(0.1)B41.579.84(9.0
]LS75.1EH5.1EV0.1DC[0.90.1
)]LS()EH()EV()DC([M
2
ff
2
f
LSmaxPminPminPabuttoe
⋅=
−−
+−++=
−−
+−++=
)(+)(+)( + )(=
γ+ γ+ γ+ γη=
 
The total loads and moments are: 
m/mkN8.408
m/kN4.220m/kN4.188
PPP abutvgirdersvv
⋅=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN1.354
m/mkN1.160m/mkN0.194
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is: 
m866.0
)m/kN8.408/()m/mkN1.354(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
And the eccentricity, ey, is: 
m73.0
m866.0m6.1
m866.02/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
The eccentricity should be in the middle half of the footing, or: 
m8.04/)m2.3(4/Bf ==  
Since , B4/Be fy < f = 3.2 m satisfies the eccentricity (overturning) requirement.   
C - 42 

Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
Compute B′f using maximum load factors.  At the strength limit state, the load factors γTU, γCR 
and γSH for force effects are all equal to 0.5. 
m/kN1.396
m25
kN)1538(75.1)446(5.1)5233(25.1
]LL75.1DW5.1DC[1.250.1
]LLDWDC[P LLmaxPmaxPgirdersv
=
++=
)(+)( + )(=
)(γ+)( γ+)( γη=
 
m/mkN7.482
m25
mkN)3392(5.0)2138(75.1)620(5.1)7274(25.1
]SH)CR(TU5.0(LL)75.1DW)(5.1[1.25(DC)0.1
SH)](5.0CR)(5.0TU)(5.0)LL()DW()DC([M LLmaxPmaxPgirderstoe
⋅=
⋅−+++=
+++++=
+++γ+ γ+γη=
 
m/kN8.300
)73.12.3)(69.93(35.1)2.3)(81.10(25.1)29.57(25.1
)73.1B)(69.93(35.1)B81.1029.57(25.1
)]EV(35.1)DC[1.25(0.1
)]EV()DC([P
ff
maxPmaxPabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 + =
 γ+ γη=
 
m/mkN0.328
)97.48(75.1
)6.146(5.1))]2.3)(5.0(865.0)(73.12.3)(69.93[(35.1
)2.3)(41.5(25.1)79.84(25.1
)97.48(75.1)6.146(5.1
))]B)(5.0(865.0)(73.1B)(69.93[(35.1)B41.579.84(25.1
]LS75.1EH5.1EV35.1DC[1.250.1
)]LS()EH()EV()DC([M
2
ff
2
f
LSmaxPminPminPabuttoe
⋅=
−
−+−+
+=
−−
+−++=
)(+)(+)( + )(=
γ+ γ+ γ+ γη=
 
 
 
 
C - 43 

The total loads and moments are: 
m/mkN9.696
m/kN8.300m/kN1.396
PPP abutvgirdersvv
⋅=
+=
+=
 
m/mkN7.810
m/mkN0.328m/mkN7.482
MMM abuttoegirderstoetoe
⋅=
⋅+⋅=
+=
 
The arm of the resultant is: 
m163.1
)m/kN9.696/()m/mkN7.810(
P/Marm vtoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is: 
m44.0
m163.1m6.1
m163.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
And the effective footing width is: 
m32.2
m88.0m2.3
)m44.0(2m2.3
e2BB yff
=
−=
−=
−=′
 
So the applied stress is: 
kPa300
m32.2/kN9.696
B/Pq fvapplied
=
=
′=
 
From Figure C2-3, the nominal bearing resistance at the strength limit state for an effective 
footing width of 2.32 m is about 1300 kPa.  Applying a resistance factor of 0.35, the factored 
resistance at the strength limit state is: 
C - 44 

appliedultR qkPa455)kPa1300(35.0)q(Q ≥==ϕ=  (OK) 
Check sliding: 
The factored horizontal shear force must be less than the factored nominal sliding resistance.  
This is evaluated using minimum load factors: 
QR = ϕTQT+ϕepQep (Eqn. C-3) 
kN1.255))kN8.408(78.0(8.0QR ==  
)CRSHTU(5.0)LS(75.1)EH(5.1Vmax ++++=  
kN1.255kN6.158)25/1047(5.0)69.18(75.1)96.69(5.1 <=++=  (OK) 
Step 12b – Check the bearing pressure, maximum eccentricity and sliding at the Strength I limit 
state without the bridge loading from the girders: 
 
Check maximum eccentricity for Bf = 3.2 m: 
From Table C2-2, considering that resisting loads are multiplied by minimum factors and driving 
loads are multiplied by maximum factors, the loads and moments due to abutment components 
are: 
m/kN4.220
)73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(81.10(9.0)29.57(9.0
)73.1B)(69.93()B81.1029.57(9.0
)]EV(00.1)DC[0.9(0.1
)]EV()DC([P
ff
minPminPabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 + =
γ+ γη=
 
)]EH()EV()DC([M maxPminPminPabuttoe γ+γ+ γη=  
m/mkN8.245
)6.146(5.1))2.3(5.0865.0)(73.12.3)(69.93()2.3)(41.5(9.0)79.84(9.0
)6.146(5.1)B5.0865.0)(73.1B)(69.93(0.1)B41.579.84(9.0
)]EH(5.1)EV(0.1)DC[0.9(0.1
2
ff
2
f
⋅=
−+−++=
−+−++=
+ + =
 
C - 45 

The arm of the resultant is: 
m12.1
)m/kN4.220/()m/mkN8.245(
P/Marm abutvabuttoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is: 
m48.0
m12.1m6.1
m12.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
The eccentricity should be in the middle half of the footing, or: 
m8.04/)m2.3(4/Bf ==  
Since , B4/Be fy < f = 3.2 m satisfies the eccentricity (overturning) requirement.   
Check bearing stress for effective footing area: 
m/kN8.300
)73.12.3)(69.93(35.1)2.3)(81.10(25.1)29.57(25.1
)73.1B)(69.93(35.1)B81.1029.57(25.1
)]EV(35.1)DC[1.25(0.1
)]EV()DC([P
ff
maxPmaxPabutv
=
−++=
−++=
 + =
 γ+ γη=
 
m/mkN0.328
)97.48(75.1)6.146(5.1
))]2.3)(5.0(865.0)(73.12.3)(69.93[(35.1)2.3)(41.5(25.1)79.84(25.1
)97.48(75.1)6.146(5.1
))]B)(5.0(865.0)(73.1B)(69.93[(35.1)B41.579.84(25.1
]LS75.1EH5.1EV35.1DC[1.250.1
)]LS()EH()EV()DC([M
2
ff
2
f
LSmaxPminPminPabuttoe
⋅=
−−
+−++=
−−
+−++=
)(+)(+)( + )(=
γ+ γ+ γ+ γη=
 
C - 46 

The arm of the resultant is: 
m090.1
)m/kN8.300/()m/mkN0.328(
P/Marm abutvabuttoeR
=
⋅=
=
 
The eccentricity, ey, is: 
m51.0
m09.1m6.1
m09.12/m2.3
arm2/Be Rfy
=
−=
−=
−=
 
And the effective footing width is: 
m18.2
m02.1m2.3
)m51.0(2m2.3
e2BB yff
=
−=
−=
−=′
 
So the applied stress is: 
kPa138
m18.2/kN8.300
B/Pq fvapplied
=
=
′=
 
From Figure C2-3, the nominal bearing resistance at the strength limit state for an effective 
footing width of 2.18 m is about 1260 kPa.  Applying a resistance factor of 0.35, the factored 
resistance at the strength limit state is: 
appliedultR qkPa441)kPa1260(35.0)q(Q ≥==ϕ=  (OK) 
Check sliding: 
The factored horizontal shear force must be less than the factored nominal sliding resistance.  
This is evaluated using minimum load factors: 
epepTTR QQQ ϕ+ϕ=  (Eqn. C-3) 
C - 47 

kN5.137))kN4.220(78.0(8.0QR ==  
)EH(5.1Vmax =  
kN5.137kN9.104)96.69(5.1 <==  (OK) 
 
Step 13 Check the bearing pressure, eccentricity and sliding at the extreme limit state: 
This step is skipped in this example.  See Example C-1 for an extreme limit state design check. 
 
Step 14 Perform the structural design of the footing: 
The structural engineer performs this step. 
 
C - 48 